Black_Swan_Academic
In repo

West Chester Univ ersity West Chester Univ ersity
West Chester Univ ersity Digital Commons West Chester Univ ersity Digital Commons
Languages & Cultur es Faculty Publications College of Ar ts & Humanities
9-2021
Aronofsky ’s Black Swan as a P ostmodern F airy Tale: Mirr oring a Aronofsky ’s Black Swan as a P ostmodern F airy Tale: Mirr oring a
Narcissistic Society Narcissistic Society
Margarete Johanna Landwehr
West Chester Univ ersity of P ennsylv ania , mlandwehr@wcupa.edu
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /digitalcommons.wcupa.edu/langcult_facpub
Part of the Film and Media Studies Commons
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Landwehr , M. J. (2021). Ar onofsky ’s Black Swan as a P ostmodern F airy Tale: Mirr oring a Nar cissistic
Society . Humanities - Basel, 10 (3), 1-18. http:/ /dx.doi.or g/10.3390/h10030086
This Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the College of Ar ts & Humanities at W est Chester
Univ ersity Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Languages & Cultur es Faculty Publications b y an
authoriz ed administr ator of W est Chester Univ ersity Digital Commons. F or mor e information, please contact
librs@wcupa.edu .
humanities
Article
Aronofsky’s Black Swan as a Postmodern Fairy Tale:
Mirroring a Narcissistic Society
Margarete Johanna Landwehr
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Landwehr, Margarete
Johanna. 2021. Aronofsky’s Black
Swan as a Postmodern Fairy Tale:
Mirroring a Narcissistic Society.
Humanities 10: 86. https://doi.org/
10.3390/h10030086
Received: 3 June 2021
Accepted: 26 June 2021
Published: 30 June 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).Department of Languages and Cultures, College of Arts and Humanities, West Chester University,
West Chester, PA 19382, USA; mlandwehr@wcupa.edu
Abstract: Based on the plot of Swan Lake, Black Swan depicts an ingenue’s metamorphosis into
a woman and a prima ballerina that contains a fairy-tale plot in which a naïve heroine overcomes
enemies and obstacles in order to achieve success and sexual maturity. Unlike a traditional fairy tale,
this cinematic tale concludes with death and the clear distinctions between good and evil, helper and
adversary and reality vs. fantasy are ﬂuid. As in many fairy tales, the ﬁlm criticizes the values of
its era, namely, the narcissistic aspects of contemporary society with its excessive worship of youth,
beauty and celebrity, and its most pernicious results—escape into fantasy and insanity, aggressive
rivalry, violence, and self-destruction.
Keywords: Black Swan; Swan Lake; metamorphosis; narcissism; postmodern fairy tale
1. Introduction
In an article in the New York Times , Salman Rushdie (2021) describes the power of fairy
tales. Although they depict places of “beautiful impossibility,” they contain truths about
human nature that are still relevant and powerful today:
The stories that made me fall in love with literature in the ﬁrst place were tales full of
beautiful impossibility, which were not true but by being not true told the truth, often more
beautifully and memorably than stories that relied on being true. Those stories didn’t have
to happen once upon a time either. They could happen right now. Yesterday, today or the
day after tomorrow. . . .Yet, their power endures; and it does so, I believe, because for all
their cargo of monsters and magic, these stories are entirely truthful about human nature
(even when in the form of anthropomorphic animals). All human life is here, brave and
cowardly, honorable and dishonorable, straight-talking and conniving . . .(Rushdie 2021).
In short, fairy tales constitute insightful explorations of the full range of human traits—
the ugly and beautiful, kindness and cruelty, love and murder, good and evil. These
revelations about human relationships are often cloaked in fantastic or animal ﬁgures—
the jealous witch, the fairy godmother, the seductive wolf, the handsome prince, and
benevolent fairies. Passed down to generations through oral tales, they often contain
wisdom on how to cope with life’s challenges. This wisdom seems particularly relevant
during a once-in-a-century pandemic. As Rushdie (2021) observes: “the stories ask the
greatest and most enduring question of literature: How do ordinary people respond to
the arrival in their lives of the extraordinary? And they answer: Sometimes we don’t do
so well, but at other times we ﬁnd resources within ourselves that we did not know we
possessed, and so we rise to the challenge, we overcome the monster, Beowulf kills Grendel
and Grendel’s more fearsome mother as well, Red Riding Hood kills the wolf, or Beauty
ﬁnds the love within the beast and then he is beastly no more. And that is ordinary magic,
human magic, the true wonder of the wonder tale.
Ballets, plays, and ﬁlms sometimes serve as contemporary fairy tales as they are
communal stories that we experience collectively in a theater and from which we some-
times learn lessons such as how to overcome obstacles and deal with adversaries. These
communal art forms, like fairy tales, can also serve as a form of social critique by exposing
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86. https://doi.org/10.3390/h10030086 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/humanities
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 2 of 18
society’s shortcomings and injustice through portrayals of villains or evil enemies who
are punished.
Black Swan , a cinematic fairy tale, mixes fantasy with reality by depicting its story
entirely through the perspective of an increasingly unhinged protagonist, the ballerina
Nina. As in a fairy tale, her metamorphosis from naïve ing énue to a woman and prima
ballerina occurs through her confronting many adversaries—her overbearing mother, a
devious rival, a haunting predecessor, and a demanding ballet director. Nina’s female
rivals serve as her Doppelgänger or double ﬁgures, common in traditional and literary fairy
tales. Yet, instead of the fairy tale happy ending, the ﬁlm contains a dark conclusion,
which portrays a society in which success can come at a high price: Nina’s madness and
demise depict her ﬁnal achievement, her stunning premiere performance, in a questionable
light. Common in postmodern fairy tales, this shocking reversal exposes and condemns a
contemporary world in which the death of a beautiful, successful woman is all too frequent.
After discussing the swan motif as a symbol of the relationship between sexuality and
violence, a prominent theme in the ﬁlm, and the narrative sources of Swan Lake in Section 2,
I will analyze three aspects of this cinematic fairy tale: the metamorphosis of the heroine
from child to adult, a common theme in traditional fairy tales (Section 3); psychological
and mythic interpretations of the “anti-fairy tale” aspects of the ﬁlm, in particular, the
ambiguous death scene at the ﬁlm’s conclusion, (Section 4); and the role of the fairy tale as
social critique, in this case, of a narcissistic society (Section 5).
2. The Swan Motif and Sources for Swan Lake
Tchaikovsky’s masterpiece, which premiered at the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow in
1877, has many distinguished predecessors in mythology, art, poetry, folklore and German
Romantic literature in which the swan motif serves as an archetypal symbol of sexuality.
Since the Greek myth in which Zeus, disguised as a swan, ravishes Leda, the swan has
symbolized the potentially savage aspects of sexuality. Helen of Troy, Leda’s daughter with
Zeus and the King of Sparta’s wife, embodies this intertwining of beauty with brutality.
Helen’s loveliness bewitches Paris, who kidnaps her from Sparta and triggers the Greeks’
invasion of Troy. Thus, the face that launched a thousand ships, the symbol of ultimate
beauty, precipitates a war and the destruction of a civilization.
This myth served as a symbol of sexuality primarily in Italian Renaissance painting.
Based on a brief account of Ovid’s Latin narrative poem Metamorphoses , which translates
into “changes of shape” and constitutes a collection of tales of love and transformation,
these artworks portray a woman in the act of copulation with a swan, a socially acceptable
pictorial substitute for human sexual intercourse. Thus, the swan serves as a symbol of
disguised human sexuality. Famous artistic depictions of this theme include copies of lost
paintings by da Vinci and Michelangelo, a Roman marble statue, a painting by Correggio,
and Cezanne’s Leda and the Swan . Poems by Ruben Dario, Ronsard, and William Butler
Yeats also depict this theme. Yeats succinctly links the rape, an act of violence, but also of
creation, the engendering of Helen, with destruction, Troy’s devastation and the murder
of the Greek war hero Agamemnon by his power-hungry wife Clytemnestra upon his
return from the Trojan War: “A shudder in the loins engenders there. The broken wall, the
burning roof and tower And Agamemnon dead.”1
Two probable sources of Swan Lake’s libretto portray this intertwining of beauty with
death, creativity with destruction.2Tchaikovsky’s acquaintances recalled his keen interest
in the life of the “Swan King,” the Bavarian Wittelsbach King Ludwig II, who is also
known as the “Fairy Tale King.” Ludwig II’s tragic life had been marked by the sign of
the swan and may have served as the prototype for the dreamer Prince Siegfried of Swan
Lake. Ludwig’s famous castle in the Alps, Neuschwanstein , or “New Swan Stone,” was
built near the Schwanensee or Swan Lake. Ludwig had a grotto built on the grounds of
his exquisite, neo-Roccoco style palace Linderhof for performances of his favorite opera,
Wagner’s Lohengrin whose central symbol is a swan. It was claimed that Ludwig, like
Odette, committed suicide by drowning, but many believe that he was murdered.3
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 3 of 18
Swan Lake’s libretto may be based on a literary fairy tale The Stolen Veil (Der Geraubte
Schleier) by Johann Musaeus, a German Romantic writer. Its heroine Zoe of Naxos, a
descendent of Leda and the swan, is transformed once a year into a swan in order to travel
to a magical pond in Germany that bestows upon the bather eternal beauty and youth.
While in the pond, she and her companions turn into nymphs. Benno, a hermit, tells
the knight Friedbert, his companion, the story of his forbidden love for Zoe, a married
Greek princess, his imprisonment and escape to Germany, and his settling near the pond in
order to catch a glimpse of her. Later, we learn, the jealous husband who had imprisoned
Benno for his love of Zoe, no longer allowed his wife to travel to the pond and her beauty
withered away, because the lovers were kept apart. This intertwining of beauty and tragic
love constitute the story’s central theme.4
3. A Cinematic Fairy Tale: The Doppelgänger’s Role in a Metamorphosis
Darren Aronofsky’s ﬁlm, which premiered at the 67th Venice International Film
Festival in 2010, contains the Doppelgänger (double ﬁgure) motif and related themes of
the potentially destructive nature of love through betrayal taken from the ballet and
from a screenplay he had been revising for a ﬁlm The Understudy . The latter drew upon
Dostoevsky’s story The Double and the melodrama All About Eve , which portrays the
intense competition between an older actress (Betty Davis) and her younger professional
and romantic rival (Anne Baxter). While working on a revision of The Understudy , he
conceived the central idea for Black Swan (Dollar 2010).
Set in contemporary New York, this psychological thriller depicts the sexual and pro-
fessional maturation of Nina Sayers, who strives for the coveted dual role of Odette/Odile,
inSwan Lake . Nina’s initial attempts to dance perfectly reveal her obsessive striving for
the prima ballerina role, which excludes living a full life as a young adult. Two women,
her domineering mother Erica and her devious rival Lily, pull Nina in opposite directions.
If the former attempts to overly protect Nina, as symbolized in her child-like bedroom of
pinks and whites, then Lily introduces Nina to the big-city life of sex, drugs, alcohol and
men, as depicted in the red-lit underground club that she and Nina visit. Both women,
and, to a lesser extent, Beth, Nina’s predecessor, serve as her Doppelgängers or alter egos,
a ﬁgure that often appears in folk tales and literary fairy tales and appears as a jealous
stepmother/witch, a rival, or an adversary. These adversarial ﬁgures often depict the
hero/heroine’s universal, psychological struggles during the maturation process such as
attempts to gain autonomy as portrayed in the mother/daughter conﬂict ( Snow White ) or
to satisfy sexual desire in a fulﬁlling adult life as seen in romantic rivalry ( Cinderella ).
In his classic essay “The Uncanny,” Sigmund Freud ([1970] 1982, p. 97) discusses
theDoppelgänger , a prominent ﬁgure in German fairytales and Romantic literary works
such as E.T.A Hoffmann’s The Devil’s Elixir . In such tales, the protagonist may resemble
another character and often identiﬁes with him/her. Freud cites Otto Rank’s study of the
literary motif of the Doppelgänger as a mirror image or shadow-self of the hero/heroine
(Freud [1970] 1982, p. 256). Freud adds that the creation of a double can serve as a
defense against the obliteration of the self and evolved from “ uneingeschraänkten Selbstliebe ,”
“unlimited self-love” that evolves from narcissism, which dominates the psychic life of the
child and “primitive” (wo)man (258). In severe pathological cases, this second self is split
off from the psyche and often projected onto another (258–59). Freud’s ideas about the
relationship between the Doppelgänger ﬁgure and narcissism will help to illuminate Nina’s
psychological development. However, Jungian theory, which focuses on universal myths
and archetypes that occur frequently in fairy tales, will provide additional insight into
Nina’s evolution both in the context of fairy tale motifs and the psychological processes they
portray. In particular, the Jungian psychoanalyst Marie-Louise von Franz, who worked
closely with Jung from 1934 until his death in 1961 and who published widely on dreams
and fairy tales, links the hero/ine’s progress in a fairy tale with universal psychic growth.
As von Franz (1987) states in Shadow and Evil in Fairytales (12), “ . . .fairy tales mirror the
most basic psychological structures of man [and woman] to a greater extent than myths
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 4 of 18
and literary products. As Jung once said, when you study fairy tales, you can study the
anatomy of man [sic].” Unlike epics such as the Babylonian Gilgamesh or the ancient Greek
Odyssey or myths of Athena or Zeus, which are embedded in their respective civilizations,
“the fairy tale can migrate better for it is so elementary and reduced to its basic structural
elements that it appeals to everybody (von Franz 1987, p. 12).”
Aronofsky’s melodrama incorporates several folktale tropes including a conﬂict be-
tween a naïve protagonist and an evil adversary, the destructive envy of a mother towards
her daughter, and the heroine’s metamorphosis from child to mature woman. In Morphol-
ogy of the Folktale, Vladimir Propp ([1968] 1979, p. 79) calls these adversaries villains
who struggle with the protagonist. But, these villains/ Doppelgängers ultimately and para-
doxically, also serve, as “helpers” as it is through her struggle with these adversaries,
particularly with her mother and Lily, that Nina gains maturation, called by Propp transﬁg-
uration. The competition between Nina and her rival Lily, for the coveted prima ballerina
role calls to mind the rivalry between Cinderella and her jealous stepsisters. Erica Sayers’
envy of her daughter’s success mirrors the vanity and malevolence of Snow White’s and
Cinderella’s stepmothers. Finally, Nina’s metamorphosis from a child into an adult reﬂects
the fairy-tale protagonist’s dangerous journey, a metaphor for the maturation process that
entails overcoming obstacles, rivals, and/or enemies.
Both the ballet and the ﬁlm’s early scenes, like many fairy tales, contain an essential di-
chotomy of innocence/evil and white/black. The ﬁlm focuses on the competition between
the naive, vulnerable Nina (Natalie Portman) and the shrewd, seductive Lily (Mila Kunis),
a morally ambiguous ﬁgure, and Nina’s rival for the coveted role of the Swan Queen. Their
off-stage rivalry mirrors the on-stage one between Odette and Odile for the prince’s heart.
Odette (Nina), the white swan, embodies purity and grace, whereas the evil Odile (Lily),
the black swan and daughter of the malicious sorcerer Von Rothbart (Red Beard), serves as
Odette’s dark Doppelgänger . Rothbart has enchanted Odette, a princess, into a swan, who
regains her human form at night. Only the love of a faithful man can break the spell. (In
a similar vein, the seductive ballet director Thomas, who is transformed into Rothbart in
one sexual scene, encourages Nina to discover her sexuality in order to break through her
paralyzing inhibitions and discover her creative potential.) While hunting, Prince Siegfried
discovers Odette’s transformation from a swan into a ravishing woman. He falls in love
with her and invites her to a royal ball. Disguised as Odette, Odile attends the ball and
tricks Siegfried into breaking his vow. Mistaking Odile for Odette, he declares his love
for her. Because of his betrayal, Odette cannot be freed from her enchantment. In despair,
she throws herself into a lake and the prince follows her; their death destroys Rothbart’s
powers and they ascend into heaven.
As folklorist Barbara Fass Leavy (1994, pp. 218–19) notes in In Search of the Swan
Maiden: A Narrative on Folklore and Gender , in animal-bride fairy tales, associations among
black=animal=nature=evil are quite common. In most mythologies, darkness is equated with
evil, sex, and destruction. The dichotomy between virtue and evil, true and false brides, is
also common in folklore. The fair, blond woman is sexually innocent, whereas her black coun-
terpart embodies “depraved sexuality as well as generalized evil” (Fass Leavy 1994, p. 220) .
The sensual Lily wears black, whereas, early in the ﬁlm, the waif-like Nina’s white and
pink clothing suggest her innocence. These colors dominate her bedroom with its stuffed
animals and dolls. The toys, colors, and musical jewelry box with its twirling ballerina un-
derscore Nina’s childlike nature. Yet, the butterﬂies in the bedroom wallpaper foreshadow
her maturation into an adult.
Lily, who plays a signiﬁcant role in Nina’s maturation, is her Doppelgänger (Goldenberg
2013, p. 112). Lily initiates Nina’s discovery of her sexuality by enticing her away from a
quiet evening with her overprotective mother to a wild night of drinking, drugs, dancing,
and men in a dark, underground club that suggest a witches’ Sabbath or an ancient
bacchanalia. Nina’s putting on Lily’s seductive black lingerie top has the traits of an
initiation scene, a rite of passage. The hellish-red light that dominates this scene and
completes the red, white and black color trilogy common in fairy tales such as Snow White
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 5 of 18
contrasts with the whites and pinks of Nina’s bedroom and resembles an underworld of
taboo (unconscious?) desires, an appropriate setting for Nina’s initiation into her sexuality.
Lily, who reveals a pair of black wings on her back and whose name may allude to Lilith, the
dark angel (or demon) from Hebrew mythology, makes sexual overtures to Nina in the cab
ride home and they appear to have a sexual encounter in Nina’s bedroom. This experience
arouses Nina’s sexual curiosity and transforms her. Her metamorphosis culminates in her
sensual performance of the black swan Odile.
Lily’s ambiguous role as friend and rival manifests itself in her morally questionable
overtures towards Nina, which put Nina’s prima ballerina status in jeopardy.5For example,
Lily’s invitation to the club causes Nina to oversleep the next morning and almost miss her
crucial rehearsal as the Swan Queen. When Nina arrives at the dance hall, she discovers
that Lily is serving as her stand-in. Thus, Lily’s behavior is morally ambiguous, as it is
unclear to viewers (and Nina) whether her invitation to a night of debauchery constitutes a
friendly gesture of reconciliation or a calculated plan to provide an opportunity for Lily to
usurp Nina’s role as the Swan Queen (or both).
On a symbolic level, Lily, as Nina’s Doppelgänger, embodies her shadow , that consists
of unacknowledged aspects of one’s personality, the unlived life, and that frequently
appears in fairy tales.6The shadow serves as a metaphor that represents “unknown or
little-known attributes and qualities of the ego” (von Franz 1964, p. 168). In dreams and
myths, the shadow appears as a person of the same sex as the dreamer (von Franz 1991,
p. 35) and “usually contains values that are needed by consciousness, but that exist in a
form that makes it difﬁcult to integrate them into one’s life (von Franz 1991, p. 36).” Lily
represents the uninhibited passion, ruthless ambition, and taboo-breaking freedom that
Nina has repressed, but eventually expresses, in part, as a result of her inﬂuence. (This
shadow motif also constitutes a key aspect in the performance of the Swan Queen, as the
ballerina, who usually dances both the Odette and Odile roles, is instructed to dance them
differently in order to show that “the evil and pure swans are at the same time different and
essentially similar (Fass Leavy 1994, p. 217)”7). The shadow can appear during outbursts
of rage, impulsive or inadvertent acts, or in dreams (von Franz 1991, p. 35). Thus, Nina’s
dream of dancing the role of the black swan embodies her repressed sexuality, reveals
unconscious desires, and foreshadows her artistic success.
Lily not only appears to viewers as Nina’s Doppelgänger, but Nina also projects her
own taboo feelings—her sexual drive and her ambition—onto Lily. Both Freudians and
Jungians designate an individual’s perceiving a repressed aspect of the self in another as
a projection: “if people observe their own unconscious tendencies in other people, this is
called a projection (von Franz 1991, p. 37).” Jung described this shadow as an inferiority
that individuals may wish to “escape,” by “looking for everything dark, inferior and culpa-
ble in others (Jung 1970, p. 203)”. As William Miller (1991, p. 39) states, “Projection is an
unconscious mechanism that is employed whenever a trait or characteristic of our personal-
ity that has no relation to consciousness becomes activated. As a result of the unconscious
projection, we observe and react to this unrecognized personal trait in other people. We
see in them something that is part of ourselves, but which we fail to see in ourselves.”
Furthermore, “ . . .anytime our response to another person involves excessive emotion or
overreaction, we can be sure that something unconscious has been prodded and is being
activated (Miller 1991, p. 40). In a similar vein, Freud states in “The Uncanny,” that any
emotion that is repressed can mutate, when repressed, into fear (Freud [1970] 1982, p. 263) .
As Nina’s repressed sexuality and ambition come to the surface, she becomes suspicious,
even paranoid of Lily’s intentions, which is, in part, justiﬁed, and lashes out at her in
anger, which suggests that Nina’s increasingly intense battle with Lily mirrors an internal
conﬂict. Moreover, in numerous scenes, such as the sexual encounter between Lily and
Nina and Nina’s violent dressing room “murder” of Lily during the night of her debut
performance, Lily’s face morphs into Nina’s, which creates what I shall call cognitive
ambiguity as viewers aren’t certain what is “real” and what is part of Nina’s disturbed
and disturbing imagination. This morphing of faces from one to the other and cognitive
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 6 of 18
ambiguity between fantasy and reality intimates that Lily serves as a projection of Nina’s
repressed self, her shadow. Spectators’ observing events through Nina’s eyes blurs the
distinction between reality and fantasy.
Black Swan also depicts a fairytale mother/daughter rivalry. Nina’s possessive mother
Erica (Barbara Hershey), a former ballerina who gave up her career to have a child, demon-
strates ambivalence towards Nina’s success, which may indicate jealousy towards her
reminiscent of the evil machinations of Snow White’s jealous stepmother, but also a classic
Hollywood archetype. Erica attempts to control Nina’s growth both as a woman and
a ballerina. She encourages Nina’s obsession with ballet, which, ultimately, causes her
mental instability and paralyzing fear of imperfection. She regulates Nina’s attempts to live
a normal adult life. When Lily invites Nina to a night of clubbing, Erica attempts to prevent
it under the benevolent excuse, in part justiﬁed, that Nina needs her rest for her practice
the next day. Erica’s suffocating control over Nina’s body and sexual desire is evident
in a scene in which Nina masturbates in bed; on the verge of climaxing, she suddenly
sees her mother sleeping in a chair next to her bed and abruptly stops. However, as Jack
Zipes (1989, p. 212) observes, the generational conﬂict in which “stepmothers habitually
devise stratagems to retard the heroine’s progress” inevitably concludes with the step-
mother’s defeat as “time triumphs, delivering the daughter to inescapable womanhood and
the stepmother to aged oblivion or death.” Although Erica stiﬂes her daughter’s growth
towards maturity that contributes to Nina’s insecurity, she eventually reaches both sexual
and professional maturity.
Marie-Louise von Franz (1987, p. 178) calls such a parent the devouring mother who
spoils her children “to death” and constantly interferes in their affairs. Erica’s constant
monitoring of Nina’s eating habits and whereabouts through her excessive phone calls
infantilizes her daughter, prevents her from reaching her full potential both as a ballerina
and a woman. von Franz (1987, p. 177) explains that such mothers often have not realized
their own creative potential and often consciously or unconsciously try to prevent others
from reaching theirs:
. . .if one does not live up to an inner possibility, then this inner possibility
becomes destructive. That’s why Dr. Jung also says that in a similar way one of
the most wicked destructive forces, psychologically speaking, is unused creative
power. . . .If someone has a creative gift and out of laziness, or for some other
reason, doesn’t use it, that psychic energy turns into sheer poison. That’s why
we often diagnose neuroses and psychotic diseases as not-lived higher possibili-
ties. . . .Someone who has unlived creativeness tries to destroy other people’s
creativity and somebody who has an unlived possibility of consciousness always
tried to blur or make uncertain anybody else’s efforts towards consciousness.
Nina’s attempts to satisfy her mother’s demands invariably fail and she becomes
increasingly rebellious towards her. Their battle over food and Nina’s outing with Lily
reveal a power struggle between mother and child. As Kim Chernin (1991, p. 57) states in
“The Underside of the Mother-Daughter Relationship,” a mother may resent the limitations
of her life imposed upon her by motherhood and may feel envious, even competitive,
with her daughter, who can make other choices. She can be viewed as the daughter’s
Doppelgänger , as she has taken the alternative route of motherhood rather than pursuing a
career. The daughter’s guilt over her mother’s self-sacriﬁce and her own freedom to choose
sometimes manifests itself in starvation or self-mutilation, symptoms that Nina exhibits.8
She struggles between being the obedient child and the angry young woman yearning to
break free from Erica’s stranglehold. Instead her anger is turned inward and manifests itself
as self-abuse, severe scratching. As John Sanford (1991, p. 59) notes, children repressing
their anger towards parents in order to gain their approval could lead to a harmful split in
the child’s psyche between “the personality and shadow personality that is autonomous
and, therefore, dangerous,” that results in “the loss of contact with the vital energy that
anger provides.” When repressed, this energy can be destructive; when expressed, it can
result in freedom. Marion Woodman (1982, p. 37) claims, “So long as she [a daughter] is
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 7 of 18
obedient to a mother—actual or internal—who unconsciously wishes to annihilate her, she
is in a state of possession by a witch; she will have to differentiate herself out from that
witch in order to live her own life.” Although Nina’s struggle concludes with success, an
astonishing premiere performance, the unleashing of her repressed energy appears to have
triggered her suicide.
This female rivalry between angelic ingenue vs. demonic witch not only constitutes
a familiar conﬂict in fairy tales, but also dramatizes, as Gilbert and Gubar (2000, p. 36)
state in The Madwomen in the Attic , “the essential but unequivocal relationship between the
angel-woman and the monster woman” of western patriarchy. The competition between
the two women results from this patriarchy, whose values are voiced through the male
mirror. This observation applies not only to Nina’s relationship to her mother, but also to
her competition with her two rivals, Lily and Beth, as well.
Beth (Winona Ryder), Nina’s predecessor and the ballet director’s former lover, who
is enraged at being replaced by Nina, serves as a ﬁnal Doppelgänger ﬁgure as her fate
preﬁgures Nina’s downfall. She confronts Nina at a beneﬁt gala and in a drunken rage
accuses her of usurping her role by seducing the director Thomas. We later learn of Beth’s
subsequent nervous breakdown and suicide attempt, and view her broken body and spirit
in a hospital room. While Nina visits Beth, she “sees” Beth stabbing herself with a nail ﬁle
and is shocked when Beth’s face transforms into her own. This scene, like many others, is
a cognitively ambiguous one as viewers cannot be certain how much of what they see is
reality or Nina’s fantasy.9Beth’s mental collapse and disﬁgurement from a suicide attempt
foreshadow both Nina’s psychological disintegration and death.
Thus, the characters of the contemporary ballet world in Black Swan depict a very
different reality from that of traditional fairy tales that inspire trust and conﬁdence, because
even though the fairy tale hero (sic) feels abandoned in a dangerous world, he (or she)
learns that “despite our ignorance of ultimate things, it is possible to ﬁnd a secure place in
the world (Lüthi 1996, p. 302).” As Lüthi (1996, p. 304) elaborates: “The fairy tale is the
poetic expression of the conﬁdence that we are secure in a world not destitute of sense, that
we can adapt ourselves to it and act and live even if we cannot view or comprehend the
world as a whole.” The traditional fairy-tale protagonist has faith the s/he can succeed in
overcoming obstacles through brains, brawn, and/or help from kind humans or animals.
Black Swan , however, depicts a dangerous urban milieu in which Nina does not ﬁnd secure
footing (pun intended) and does not know whom she can trust. Her mother, Lily, Beth,
and Thomas are all portrayed as morally ambiguous ﬁgures as their behavior is morally
questionable, that is, viewers (and Nina) cannot be certain if their motives are self-serving,
altruistic, or both. Lastly, Black Swan subverts another basic premise of fairy tales that
“suffering can purify and strengthen” (Lüthi 1996, p. 303). Despite her victories over others
and herself, Nina’s ﬁnal triumph, her brilliant performance, ends in death.
4. The Anti-Fairy Tale: Psychological and Mythic Portrayals of Death
The ﬁlm’s ambiguous conclusion simultaneously suggests the optimistic ending of
a traditional fairy tale and a destructive one of a postmodern, anti-fairy tale. Wolfgang
Mieder (2008, p. 50) agrees with Andre Jolles that anti-fairy tales ( Antimärchen ) have a
tragic conclusion rather than the normal happy ending and contrasts “the perfect world of
the fairy tale with sociopolitical issues, marital problems, and economic worries (Mieder
50).” In the traditional fairy-tale template, Nina becomes a mature adult, who has reached
sexual liberation off-stage and the pinnacle of professional success on-stage. In this inter-
pretation, Odette’s drowning in a lake, which frees her from Rothbart’s spell and from
her white swan avatar, symbolizes the loss of Nina’s innocence and her maturation. Thus,
Odette’s metamorphosis or transﬁguration from a swan into a spiritual being reﬂects
Nina’s symbolic death and liberation from her former, psychologically crippled self. In
a similar vein, psychoanalyst West-Leuer (2017, p. 1243) remarks that Nina experiences
her death “as a liberation from her eternal compulsion to sacriﬁce herself and be sacriﬁced
as a well-adjusted nice girl.” Pavol Bargar (2018, p. 328) argues that Nina “is redeemed
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 8 of 18
by the beauty she is experiencing” and that the “perfection” she is referring to is “the
redemptive power of beauty which transcends individuals.” The alternative, more popular
“anti-fairy-tale” interpretation suggests that Nina, like Odette, dies at the ballet’s ﬁnale
after stabbing herself with a mirror shard. Because the viewer shares Nina’s perspective
and the ﬁlm’s violent scenes are cognitively ambiguous, it is not clear whether her death is
real or hallucinatory. Previous scenes of Nina’s self-mutilation and attack of Lily prove to
be imaginary. As Vignoles-Russell (2015, p. 33) observes, “ . . .the ﬁlm manages to sustain
the protagonist’s perspective and interiority from beginning to end with no interruption.”
Thus, the ﬁnal scene could be understood as totally imagined by Nina.10However, the
horriﬁed reaction of Thomas and the ballerinas indicate that the red ﬂuid on Nina’s white
costume is an actual wound.
Thus, despite its fairytale motifs, Black Swan lacks three of the four key traits of tradi-
tional fairy tales as cited by the folklorist Tolkien (1996, p. 271): fantasy, recovery, escape
from death, and consolation. Most fairy tales offer the promise of the Great Escape, the
escape from death and the consolation of a Happy Ending (Tolkien 1996, p. 284). Nina’s
probable death subverts the fairy tale’s happy ending and the entire premise of conven-
tional fairy tales as “wish dreams,” as fantasy worlds in which “all things are possible”
(Lüthi 1996, p. 297) . As Helen Pilinovsky (2009, p. 138) notes, “Contemporary authors of
fairy tales use their knowledge of Story against itself: the expectations engendered by the
imprinted belief of the “happy ending” work against themselves to guarantee the opposite,
the unhappy ending, the disappointment of the dystopia predicated upon the fatal ﬂaw
of unrealistic expectation.” Aronfosky, like these contemporary authors, employs a full
repertoire of fairytale motifs only to subvert the anticipation of a triumphant ending with
an alternative tragic conclusion.
Whether a psychic or an actual death, Nina’s striving for perfection in her dancing
and her ﬁnal words “It was perfect,” offer a clue to her apparent suicide. Psychoanalyst
West-Leuer (West-Leuer 2017, p. 1240) claims that Nina has a narcissistic personality with a
“perfectionist ideal-ego” that “expects achievement, self-control, and functionality.” Marion
Woodman (1982, p. 52) describes this, ultimately, destructive pursuit of perfection as an
obsession in Addiction to Perfection: The Still Unravished Bride:
The chief sign of the pursuit of perfection is obsession. Obsession occurs when all of
the psychic energy, which ought to be distributed among the various parts of the personality
in an attempt to harmonize them, is focused on one area of the personality, to the exclusion
of everything else. Obsession is always a ﬁxation, a freezing over of the personality so that
it becomes not a living being, but something ﬁxed, like a piece of sculpture, locked into a
complex. There is always something catatonic about it, behind which is fear, which can
accelerate into blind terror so that the person may become like a wild animal caught in the
glare of headlights, unable to move.
Nina’s obsessive practicing of her dance moves, her rigid control of her body and of
her food and her continual monitoring of her body’s movements in ubiquitous mirrors
underscore her compulsive striving for perfection. Her entire life revolves around her goal
to become the prima ballerina to the exclusion of everything else. Perhaps she is fulﬁlling
her mother’s unrealized dream of becoming a ballet star? This psychic frozenness prevents
her from maturing sexually or emotionally and she remains stuck in childhood with her
toys in her white and pink bedroom. It is not until her director Thomas encourages her
to explore her sexuality and Lily drags her to the “underworld” club that Nina becomes
aware of her repressed desires and begins exploring her body.
Furthermore, Woodman (1982, p. 13) states that this perfectionist attitude originates
in a work-driven society in which individuals put on the mask (persona) of determined
efﬁciency and follow society’s “rhythms”, but that their animal nature is denied:
All day the mask or persona performs with perfect efﬁciency, but when the job is
done, these frenzied foreign rhythms continue to dominate body and Being. There is no “I”
to call a halt, no strong, differentiated ego to gear down to the natural rhythms. If these
natural rhythms have dropped down to total unconsciousness, being disappears, and the
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 9 of 18
body, like a beaten, terriﬁed, neurotic animal attempts to persevere with the rhythm totally
foreign to its nature. The wolf attitude which demands more and more and more during
the day, howls I want, I want, I want at night. Society’s values based on the work ethic and
perfectionist standards, ambitions and goals uphold the wolf attitude in the professional
jungle, but society can do nothing to feed the hungry wolf at night.”
The frenzied tempo of Nina’s daily routine—her constant dancing, her racing between
home and theater on the constantly running underground subway, the frenetic dancing at
the club—all reﬂect the constant, rapid pace of a metropolis that never sleeps.
The power play between Nina’s striving for perfection and her animal (sexual) nature
soon becomes dangerous. As Woodman (1982, p. 42) states: “Psychologically speaking, so
long as conscious and unconscious are enemies, the ego experiences itself as in constant
danger of death.” Nina’s growing paranoia and psychotic episodes signal her gradual
descent into insanity. The opposing roles of white swan vs. black swan convey the wide
abyss between her public persona, the controlled dancer, which is perfect for the white
swan role, and her private sexual desires, which, once liberated, enhance her dancing as
the black swan. The wider the abyss between the conscious self and the unconscious one,
the greater the danger is. Woodman (1982, p. 33) describes the back-and-forth swinging
between the two as a pendulum in which the psyche’s energy swings between two poles:
“The more the energy goes into one side, the more the compensation on the other . . .”
If the resistance to one side is too strong, then it can suddenly transform into the other:
“This sudden reversal of energy is called enantiodromia . It occurs when energy has been
pushed too far in one direction, and suddenly switches into the resisting energy it has
been struggling to overcome . . .. (Woodman 1982, p. 30).” This model of the psyche’s
conﬂict between public persona and the shadow (repressed desires, identities, etc.) clariﬁes
Nina’s struggle between her striving for perfection and her instinctual quest to express
her sexual energy. In her white swan makeup, she “murders” her black swan, Lily, her
shadow projection, in her dressing room. This brutally repressed self becomes “demonic”
(the black swan). As Diamond (1991, pp. 184–85) states: “when we . . .suppress, deny,
drug or otherwise try to exclude it [the shadow] from consciousness . . .we participate in
the process of evil, potentiating the violent eruptions of anger, rage, social destructiveness
and assorted psychopathologies that result from the daimonic [primal force of nature]
reasserting itself with a vengeance into its most negative forms.” Later Nina discovers that
Lily is alive and that she has stabbed herself, which can be viewed as the perfectionist
“white swan,” attempting to annihilate the “shadow/black swan,” but the shadow strikes
back. Nina’s astonishing transformation into the black swan on-stage constitutes the
sudden and complete release of this repressed shadow, but also leads to the symbolic
death of the innocent white swan and, perhaps, Nina’s actual death. Bignall (2013, p. 133)
states, “Nina’s becoming was sudden and catastrophic, not piecemeal and selective. . . .
her ﬁnal triumph of the Black Swan could not be accomplished without her failure as the
White Swan.” Thus, by employing horror motifs, ubiquitous mirrors, and CGI technology
to transform Portman into a black swan with death-like wings, Aronofsky cinematically
recreates in horrifying images Nina’s destructive psychic struggle.
Ballet dancers have conﬁrmed that Black Swan captured the torment and high-stakes
competition among dancers. Its portrayal of ballet as an art form that demands total
submission rang true for New York City Ballet soloist Ellen Bar: “The psychological
torture of being an artist felt real. The way it shows an artist being her own worst
enemy” (Maslin 2011, p. 5). Jennifer Homans, a dance critic, observes that dance tends
to attract those “who have a kind of discipline and dedication that can ﬂip into ob-
session” (Maslin 2011, p. 5) . The legendary Swan Lake is a “notorious soul crusher”
(Dollar 2010, p. 26) . Aronofsky states: “It’s the Blanche DuBois of ballet, or the Othello—
the one that takes the actor or actress over the edge. There’s a famous story about a dancer
in the Bolshoi who had a schizophrenic breakdown during ‘Swan Lake.’ There are so many
stories about dancers losing their mind (Dollar 2010, p. 26).” American Ballet principal
David Hallberg who danced the part of Prince Siegfried admits that he has felt “possessed”
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 10 of 18
while performing Swan Lake: “I have had performances like that...when it’s almost oth-
erworldly and you’re possessed by something else. I had a performance when I was not
only crying visibly but for about a week after, I was haunted by it. (Ng 2010, p. 1).” The
screenplay may also have been prompted by dancers’ memoirs such as Gelsey Kirkland’s
Dancing on my Grave and Margot Fonteyn’s Autobiography in which she writes of the “terror”
with which she faced every performance of Swan Lake .
TheDoppelgänger ﬁgure also serves as a prominent mythic ﬁgure; reviewing its mythic
signiﬁcance will add another dimension of meaning to Nina’s death. In his early work
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero Otto Rank (1971) explores the hostile brother motif as a
common mythological and literary theme. As Christine Downing (1991, p. 68) states in
“Sisters and Brothers Casting Shadows,” the brothers are often twins and that
In his later writings Rank subsumes this motif under that of the Double. The brother
is seen primarily as an inner ﬁgure, an alter ego. The Double may represent the mortal or
the immortal self, may be feared as an image of one’s mortality or prized as signally one’s
imperishability. The Double is death or the Immortal Soul [my emphasis]. It inspires
fear and love, arouses the eternal conﬂict between our need for likeness and desire for
difference. The Double answers the need for a mirror, a shadow, a reﬂection.
Read as a universal myth, Lily’s arrival in Nina’s life heralds the appearance of her
Double, which brings her death, but also immortality.11If Nina does indeed die, then her
exquisite performance of the black swan grants her enduring fame. Rank recalls that the
ancients regarded the shadow-like double as a spiritual, yet real being. The Greeks called
this aspect of the self, which survives death and is active in dreams psyche .
Thus for Rank (1971), the relationship to an inner same-sex sibling, to a double, comes
to signify relationship to one’s unconscious self, one’s psyche, and to both death and
immortality. At its deepest it expresses our longing to let the ego die and to be united with
a transcendent self. It signiﬁes our longing to surrender to something larger than our ego
(Downing 1991, pp. 68–69) . Seen in the light of Rank’s interpretation, Nina’s death is both
mortal and transcendent. In death she achieves immortality just as the white swan becomes
a spiritual being that transcends her earthly form. Nina triumphs in death through her
transcendent performance. In another reversal, Nina’s death fades out to white, a symbol of
purity and perfection (ﬂawlessness), instead of black, the usual symbolic color for death.12
5. Fairy Tale as Social Critique: Black Swan as a Mirror of a Narcissistic Society
Like many recent retellings of traditional fairy tales, Black Swan can be read as a
postmodern revision of a (literary) fairy tale, but with a dark undertone that contains
a social critique of contemporary life. Kendra Marston (2015) views the ﬁlm as a self-
referential critique of the patriarchal Hollywood star system with “the female body as
spectacle” (698). Marston (7) states that Black Swan serves as a cultural critique of gender
relations and the place of women in the entertainment industry. She (701) cites Elisabeth’s
Bronfen (1992, xi) argument that “culture uses art to dream the deaths of beautiful women.”
Some ﬁlm critics claim that Black Swan criticizes the vicious competition of the ballet world
as an intensiﬁed and openly aggressive example of cut-throat capitalism. Although I
support this interpretation and will review its merits below, I also believe that the ﬁlm
addresses the growing narcissistic trend in individuals and American society and the
destructive potential of this trend.
Read as a social critique of late capitalism, Black Swan exposes the Darwinian ﬁght for
survival in New York, the capitalist and ﬁnancial capital of the world. As the Los Angeles
Times critic Kenneth Turan (2010, p. 1) observes, the ﬁlm takes a “wildly melodramatic,
unashamedly pulpy look at the blood sport that is New York City ballet.” The ballerinas’
resentment of the older prima donna Beth, whom they call “menopausal” and who, they
wish, would retire so that one of them may replace her, reveals the potentially malicious
rivalry in such a competitive and selective institution. In this postmodern interpretation,
Nina, Erica, Lily and Beth, play not only the roles of innocent maiden, evil stepmother, and
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 11 of 18
devious rivals, familiar to readers of Grimms’ folktales, but also are ﬁgures in a postmodern,
cautionary tale of the high cost of professional success.
The gala party scene in which the ballet director Thomas ﬂatters donors and ﬂaunts
his new star Nina, whom he informs of the company’s precarious ﬁnancial state and whom
he persuades to join in the “performance,” underscores the relationship between art and
money: The ballet company needs a “fresh face” (Nina) and discards the old one (Beth)
in order to present a vibrant, new product to its investors. Thus, we view Nina through
Thomas’s eyes as a potential ﬁnancial asset as well as a gifted dancer. Furthermore, Beth
and Nina appear as interchangeable commodities, professionally and personally. “My little
princess,” the affectionate term Thomas used for Beth and designates for Nina once she has
attained star status refers to the fairy-tale aspect of her metamorphosis from unknown artist
to superstar, but also to the interchangeability of his prima ballerinas and (potential) lovers
and the transactional nature of personal relationships. The invitation to his apartment after
the gala appears to be a prelude to a seduction scene (but isn’t) and his passionate kiss
and sexual advances towards Nina in other scenes are morally ambiguous. Does he wish
to enable Nina to become a formidable dancer by encouraging her to discover her sexual
energy? Does he desire Nina as his lover? Or does he crave the glory and ﬁnancial boost
of “discovering” or “creating” a new superstar? All three possibilities appear probable.
As noted earlier, Beth’s demise, her physical and mental brokenness, foreshadows Nina’s
insanity and suicide and appears as a morality tale of the devastating toll the capitalist
work ethic can exert on its workforce, especially on young, vulnerable high achievers.13
Treating women as “marketable commodities” as Jack Zipes (1989, pp. 216–17) notes,
occurs in traditional Romantic tales as well: “Because the heroine adapts conventional
female virtues, that is, patience, sacriﬁce and dependency, and because she submits to
patriarchal needs, she consequently receives both the prince and a guarantee of social
and ﬁnancial security through marriage.” In Black Swan there is a reversal of this pattern.
Instead of marriage, Thomas offers Nina a brilliant career, which requires patience, sacriﬁce,
and dependency, but also such conventional “masculine” traits as ruthless ambition, a
competitive spirit, and pursuing sexual desires. Nevertheless, Thomas as the powerful
(male) director of a renowned ballet company still controls Nina’s, Beth’s, and Lily’s
professional fates.
Black Swan reveals not only the ravages of capitalism on the soul, but also the destruc-
tive aspects of an increasingly narcissistic society. The ﬁlm’s ubiquitous mirror imagery
conjures up the myth of Narcissus, the youth in Greek mythology, who shuns Echo’s
affections, sees his own face while stooping to drink in a fountain, mistakes his reﬂection
for a beautiful water nymph, and falls in love with himself. Believing that the “nymph”
was shunning him when he tried to embrace her, Narcissus pines for her and dies. Because
he is so obsessed with his own image, he cannot connect with others. As a symbol of
obsessive self-absorption, Narcissus serves as a frequent allegory in literature and ﬁlms
about dance that reveal the cost of excessive self-admiration as being incapable of loving.
The classic ﬁlm The Red Shoes (1948), which is based on a Hans Christian Anderson fairy
tale, could be viewed as a precursor to Black Swan as it portrays the protagonist’s obsession
with dance. An aspiring ballerina Vicky, who is torn between her dedication to dance and
her desire to love, is forced to choose between her career and marriage. Like Nina, Vicky
kills herself for her art by throwing herself out a window. Vicky, Nina, and Beth’s obsessive
quest for artistic perfection portrays the psychological and corporeal self-destructiveness of
their obsession. Of course, the ubiquitous mirrors that Nina stares into refer to her internal
conﬂict, but also serve as a crucial tool of her profession. As Alastair Macauley (2011, p. 1)
notes, dancers perceive in mirrors “both the ideal versions of themselves they hope to
show to the public as well as their own failings.” Ballerinas’ ﬁxation on their bodies and
movements clearly functions as a prerequisite for the near-perfect illusion that they present
on stage.
The leitmotif of the mirror clearly serves as a rich symbol with layers of meaning. It
refers not only to Nina’s internal drama and conﬂicts with her Doppelgängers, Erica, Beth
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 12 of 18
and Lily, but also to the illusory world of ballet and as a self-referential allusion to ﬁlm,
the ultimate art form of illusory images. As mentioned earlier, Nina’s struggle with her
controlling mother mirrors the conﬂict between a vulnerable princess and her evil, older
rival, usually a stepmother/queen as in Snow White with a mirror as its central symbol that
ignites the plot. When the queen discovers that Snow White is more beautiful than she is,
the older rival attempts to eliminate her. As Bruno Bettelheim (1977, pp. 202–3) observes,
The queen’s consulting the mirror about her worth—i.e., beauty—repeats the ancient
theme of Narcissus, who loved only himself so much that he became swallowed up by his
self-love. It is the narcissistic parent who feels most threatened by her child’s growing up,
because that means that the parent must be aging. As long as the child remains totally
dependent, he (sic) remains, as it were, part of the parent; he (or she) does not threaten the
parent’s narcissism. But when the child begins to mature and reaches for independence,
then he (or she) is experienced as a menace by such a parent, as happens to the queen in
Snow White .
Jack Zipes (2011, pp. 116–17) offers an additional level of meaning to the mirror
imagery in Snow White that applies as well to Black Swan . He observes that the powerful
hold that the mirror has over the queen (and, I would add, Nina) reveals social and cultural
issues on a metaphorical level, namely, that women’s value is determined by men, by
what they deem as beautiful. He notes that the queen “becomes trapped in the spectacle
of male illusions. Her identity and value as a woman are in a large part determined by
the refraction of the mirror.” In contemporary life, the camera lens, not the mirror, selects,
manipulates, and, ultimately, creates, a standard of beauty. As Zipes (2011, p. 117) notes,
“Snow White is interesting because the tale has prompted ﬁlmmakers to elaborate on the
representation of beauty, why beauty is so important for women in men’s eyes, and how the
image and nature of beauty can be manipulated through the male gaze.” This observation is
particularly applicable in the entertainment industry—in ﬁlm, theater and ballet—in which
youthful beauty and grace constitute key traits in boosting a female performer’s career.
InBlack Swan , Thomas, the only dominant male character, determines the professional
trajectory of his ballerinas through his judgmental gaze. As noted, he replaces the older
Beth with the younger Nina, as a fresh face to donors, who will ﬁll the company’s coffers.
He also pits Lily, Nina’s rival, against Nina through his encouraging and humiliating
comments on their performances. His gaze from Nina to Lily while they are in recital
clearly unnerves Nina as she clearly senses that he is comparing the two. In a conversation
with her, Thomas contrasts Nina’s too controlled performance with Lily’s more exuberant
and carefree dancing style that reveals the former’s neurotic striving for perfection and the
latter’s conﬁdant, even fearless, attitude. Thus, the director judges not only the external,
physical beauty of the rivals’ dancing, but also their inner dispositions and state of mind.
It is only when Nina breaks free of Thomas’s control, breaks out of Snow White’s glass
cofﬁn, so to speak, and can express repressed anger and sexual desire that she liberates
herself from the male gaze. Lily and Thomas may have served as (Propp’s) helpers/villains
who assisted Nina in recognizing her hidden qualities, but Nina emancipates herself. Her
initiating a passionate kiss with Thomas, who is standing in the wings, at the height of her
premier performance reverses the traditional Prince’s kiss that awakens the sleeping Snow
White or Briar Rose and underscores Nina’s self-liberation. Zipes (2011, p. 133) expresses
this liberation best: “Women cannot determine their beauty when they look into male
determined and mass-mediated mirrors. Mirrors are not the bearers of truth. They have no
authority, but, perhaps they can inform us about what we lack or what we need.”
Furthermore, I believe that the mirror imagery functions as a reﬂection and com-
mentary on our contemporary, narcissistic society. In order to build a foundation for my
interpretation, I will turn to the ﬁlm theory of the eminent ﬁlm scholar Siegfried Kracauer.
In his classic study of Weimar Cinema (1919–1933) From Caligari to Hitler: A Psychological His-
tory of the German Film , Kracauer theorized that ﬁlm frequently reveals the Weltanschauung
(worldview, attitude or mental climate) of a population in a particular time, as it is an art
form that is produced and viewed collectively and, therefore, often expresses the desires of
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 13 of 18
its audience. Kracauer ([1947] 2004, p. 6) states: “What ﬁlms reﬂect are not so much explicit
credos as psychological dispositions—those deep layers of collective mentality, which ex-
tend more or less below the dimensions of consciousness.” He (Kracauer [1947] 2004, p. 5)
points out that ﬁlms are never a product of an individual, but rather, of a group—director,
screenwriter, editor, cinematographer, stage hands, etc.—and that ﬁlms are made to appeal
to the multitudes. Kracauer ([1947] 2004, p. 8) elaborates that the peculiar mentality of a
nation is not ﬁxed, but ﬂuid: “To speak of the peculiar mentality of a nation by no means
implies the concept of a ﬁxed national character. The interest here lies exclusively in such
dispositions or tendencies as prevail within a nation at a certain stage of development.” The
cinematic motifs that appear repeatedly in popular ﬁlms depict collective wishes: “Popular
ﬁlms—or, to be more precise, popular screen motifs—can therefore be supposed to satisfy
existing mass desires (Kracauer [1947] 2004, p. 5).” He elaborates: “In recording the visible
world—whether current reality or an imaginary universe—ﬁlms therefore provide clues to
hidden mental processes (Kracauer [1947] 2004, p. 7)”.
Black Swan , which enjoyed success at the box office and (mostly) critical acclaim, mirrors
the contemporary American obsession with image. Twenge and Campbell (2009, p. 4) state in
The Narcissism Epidemic: Living in the Age of Entitlement , which was published a year before
Black Swan was released: “American culture’s focus on self-admiration has caused a ﬂight
from reality to the land of grandiose fantasy.” One key narcissistic trait is vanity, which is
closely related to self-centeredness. The Narcissist Personality Inventory (NPI) test contains
statements such as “I like to look at myself in the mirror” (2009, p. 142). Twenge and
Campbell point to the emphasis not only on appearance, but also wealth, celebrity worship
and attention seeking that mark an increasingly narcissistic society and cite statistics that
show this trend accelerating. The quantifiable cultural changes include a five-fold increase
in plastic surgery and cosmetic procedures in ten years (Twenge and Campbell 2009, p. 5).
Narcissists have an overinﬂated view of their abilities, see themselves as superior, unique,
or special, and believe they are better than others in social status, good looks, intelligence,
and creativity. The most obvious examples of this obsession with image are the politicians,
sports “heroes,” business moguls, and entertainment ﬁgures who fabricate idealized images
of themselves with the help of “spin doctors,” agents, publicists, and media consultants.
As Sandy Hotchkiss (2003, p. 181) observes, “We look on with jaded eye, knowing we are
being manipulated but enjoying the show. Eventually reality gets so distorted that we
(like Nina) no longer know who or what to believe. We ﬁnd ourselves in a narcissistic fun
house without a clue what’s behind the mirrors.” Nina’s and viewers” disorientation in
identifying reality vs. fantasy captures the chaos and confusion caused by multitudes of
sometimes contradictory images and information that can be manipulated on television,
the internet, social media, and ﬁlm.
Which social factors contribute to increasing narcissism? Twenge and Campbell refer
to reality TV shows which attract narcissists who love the limelight and which normalize
narcissistic behavior such as over-competitiveness, materialism, appearance obsession,
and the quest for fame (2009, p. 99). As Hotchkiss (2003, p. 13) states, “For Narcissists
competition of all kinds is a way to reafﬁrm superiority” and adds that narcissists (like Nina)
‘become compulsive in their pursuit of perfection. Along the way, they crave admiration
from others.” Social network sites make it possible to open the gap between fantasy and
reality as users generally only show positive aspects of their life such as partying, or
traveling. Desires and attractive personality traits are emphasized or exaggerated. On the
internet, like ballet, the fantasy principle trumps the reality principle.
But, narcissists pay a price for their inﬂated self-image: “Narcissists also lack emo-
tionally warm, caring and loving relationships with other people. Because they don’t
value deep relationships, narcissists have little concern for others and often manipulate
and exploit others, whom they view as tools to make themselves look and feel good.”
Narcissists lack empathy and are also materialistic, entitled, and aggressive when in-
sulted (Twenge and Campbell 2009, p. 30) . This violent aspect of narcissism inspired the
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 14 of 18
researcher Del Paulhus to label narcissism as one neurosis of the “Dark Triad,” which also
includes Machievellianism (manipulativeness) and sociopathy (2009, p. 20).
Black Swan constitutes a dark, postmodern allegory of narcissistic self-destruction
inherent in the obsessive pursuit of fame. Aronofsky’s ballet world with its emphasis on
appearance, performance, hyper-competition and success serves as a microcosm of an
increasingly narcissistic society obsessed with image. Ballerinas’ ﬁxation on their bodies
that, at times, include anorexia and bulimia, and hyper-vigilance with diet reﬂects our
society’s adulation of youthful beauty. The manic drive for a perfect performance and the
intense rivalry among ambitious ballerinas for plum roles reﬂect the vicious race to the
top in a society which gloriﬁes celebrity and notoriety. The self-destructiveness of Nina,
Beth, and Vicky warns that the price of this exclusive focus on appearance and success
is loss—the loss of self and of meaningful relationships. When she loses her prestigious
status as prima ballerina, the crippled Beth in her hospital bed expresses this loss when
she cries out: “I am nothing.”14The loss of her persona, her public image, drives Beth
to annihilate herself as she believes that there is nothing left of her identity. As Marie-
Louise von Franz (1987, p. 147) states: “In the archetypal experience of evil, evil powers
are seen as a crippled human, or as a distorted thing, I think that we should therefore
understand it symbolically and see in that the projection of a human psychological fact,
namely, that evil entails being swept away by one-sidedness, by only one single pattern of
behavior.” (Sexeny 2015) Thus, the obsessive pursuit of one goal often involves neglecting
other aspects of one’s personality, the shadow. von Franz (1987, p. 8) states that this shadow
can be personal and collective: “the collective shadow is particularly bad, because people
support each other in their blindness—it is only in wars or hate for other nations, that an
aspect of the collective shadow reveals itself.” Yet, plays, ballet, opera, novels, and ﬁlms
can hold up a mirror to reveal our blind spots, the hidden, ignored and neglected aspects
of ourselves to us.
6. Conclusions: Black Swan as a Postmodern Anti-Fairy Tale
In her inﬂuential study Postmodern Fairy Tales: Gender and Narrative Strategies , Cristina
Bacchilega (1997, p. 23) states that postmodern transformations of fairy tales include
“simultaneously afﬁrming and questioning strategies . . .in a variety of critically self-
reﬂexive moves.” Black Swan offers this double movement of afﬁrming and questioning
values presented in its source Swan Lake . On the one hand, Nina’s journey and demise
mirrors that of her counterpart in the fairy-tale ballet “Swan Lake.” Nina exempliﬁes the
traditional fairy tale heroine as beautiful, innocent, persecuted and suffering. Like the
White Swan Odette, she gains transcendence, through her transformative and unforgettable
performance as the Swan Queen. If death transforms Odette from a suffering human/swan
to a spiritual being, then Nina has liberated herself from her helpless child-like state into a
courageous, sensual woman and superstar. However, the horror of Nina’s insanity and
death undercuts her transcendent transﬁguration and suggests a critique of a contemporary
narcissistic society in which humans may sacriﬁce parts of their identity, their socially
undesirable traits, in their pursuit of perfect images and performances. This obsessive
pursuit of perfection can result in a psychic, even actual death.
In particular, as Bacchilega (1997, p. 24) states, postmodern fairy tales retell “histories,
values, and gendered ﬁgurations.” Aronofsky’s cinematic fairy tale transforms the story
of the broken-hearted, pure Odette who dies because a man has betrayed her into a
contemporary psychological thriller of a professional woman’s self-destructive, pursuit
of perfection. Moreover, the values gloriﬁed and viliﬁed in these works reﬂect different
social mores. The ballet, based on a 19th century literary fairy tale, exalts female innocence
and submission (the White Swan) and criticizes female deviousness and duplicity (the
Black Swan). The ﬁlm, however, depicts the heroine’s path to success as a transformation
from a passive, innocent female victim into an assertive woman with such conventional
“masculine” traits as ambition, aggression, and sexual drive. One could argue that a career
woman’s attempt to become “more like a man” is punished and that Nina’s downfall
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 15 of 18
portrays, in an exaggerated and horriﬁc way, the dilemma of contemporary working
women in “a man’s world.” If one follows this argument, then, Nina is punished, like
the evil, calculating queen in Snow White, for actively pursuing her goals instead of
passively submitting to a prince.15However, the fairy tale dichotomies of good/evil,
helper/adversary, male/female, and victim/villain are collapsed into one ﬁgure. Nina
serves as both heroine and villain as she embodies both the White and the Black Swans and
is responsible for both her success and death. As I have argued above, it is Nina’s inability
to integrate both her White Swan (her social persona) and her Black Swan (her shadow) into
one harmonious whole that leads to her demise. Nina’s dual roles as both Odette and Odile,
as victim and perpetrator, also reﬂect the morally ambiguous roles of Thomas, Beth, and
Lily as helpers/adversaries. With this moral ambiguity, the ﬁlm subverts the conventional
dichotomies of good/evil in traditional fairy tales as well as their happy ending.
Furthermore, Black Swan can be viewed as a postmodern anti-fairy tale in the same
way that Lüthi (1996, p. 303) regards Kafka’s Expressionistic tales as “anti-fairy tales”. Black
Swan , like Kafka’s Existentialist stories, depicts a threatening world in which individuals
are not secure, do not know whom to trust and may not even survive. Nina, like Kafka’s
Joseph K. in The Trial , is confronted with a nightmarish society with sinister denizens,
whose motives one cannot decipher (moral ambiguity). Unlike protagonists and readers
in the fairytale world, who can recognize helpers and villains, Nina and viewers cannot
distinguish between the two, which contributes to spectators’ sense of confusion. More-
over, as in Expressionist works, readers/viewers experience what I have called cognitive
ambiguity, because the ﬁctional events are portrayed through the protagonist’s unreliable
perspective. Because readers share Joseph’s K’s paranoid point-of-view, just as spectators
share Nina’s viewpoint, readers/viewers can never be certain what is actually happening
in the ﬁctional world of both works. Thus, one can call Black Swan an Expressionist ﬁlm, a
contemporary twin of the silent ﬁlm The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1919) that is narrated by
an inmate in an insane asylum.16We not only see what Nina sees, but we experience her
disorientation with her as well.17
Nina’s demise does offer us a moral lesson and meaning, key traits of traditional fairy
tales. Holocaust surviver and child psychoanalyst Bruno Bettelheim (1996, p. 4) claims that
fairy tales’ central role is to provide meaning for suffering and cites the German dramatist
Friedrich Schiller: “Deeper meaning resides in the fairy tales told to me in childhood than
in the truth taught by life ( The Piccolomini , III, 4). He (Bettelheim 1996, p. 309) claims
that fairy tales deal with universal human problems and offer children valuable lessons
about life: “That is exactly the message that fairy tales get across to the child in manifold
form: that a struggle against severe difﬁculties in life is unavoidable, is an intrinsic part
of human existence—but that if one does not shy away, but steadfastly meets unexpected
and often unjust hardships, one masters all hardships and at the end emerges victorious
(Bettelheim 1996, p. 311) .” Although Black Swan ’s ﬁnal scene suggests that Nina’s struggles
have destroyed her, it does offer a moral: the obsessive quest for perfection can be fatal
and humans can ﬁnd happiness if they strive for wholeness instead of perfection.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Notes
1Praised as one of Yeat’s masterpieces, his sonnet “Leda and the Swan” was cited by Camille Paglia as “the greatest poem of the
twentieth century.” (Paglia 2006, pp. 114–18).
2Some claim that the Russian fairy tale The White Duck may be another source for the ballet. In this story, a witch lures a king’s
young wife away from the palace and transforms her into a duck. The witch takes the queen’s form. The queen has three
ducklings that the witch kills and the queen/duck grieves their deaths with loud quaking. The king captures the duck and it
turns into his wife’s human form. They sprinkle magic water onto the dead ducklings who turn into children and the witch is
killed. I could locate neither the fairy tale nor any scholarly reference to this story.
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 16 of 18
3The alleged murder may have resulted from tax-payer resentment of his extravagant castles and limitless ﬁnancial support of
the composer Wagner’s lavish lifestyle. Ludwig paid for many of these enterprises with his own money, but public perception is
what matters.
4Upon Benno’s death, Friedbert leaves the hermitage, discovers three swans at the pond, and falls in love with Zoe’s and her
husband’s youngest daughter Kalliste, whose veil he steals. The daughter tells Friedbert Zoe’s tragic story; the couple returns to
his hometown to marry. But, upon donning the stolen veil, the bride transforms into a swan and ﬂies away to Naxos. Friedbert
travels to Naxos where he ﬁnds Kalliste, who has forgiven him for the theft and agrees to share her life with him. German story
downloaded from Spiegel online Projekt Gutenberg-DE on 12/30/10.
5Thomas’s seductive behavior towards Nina is equally ambiguous. Although he intimidates her in rehearsals, he also employs
ﬂattery and seduction to liberate herself from her drive for perfection. While urging her to “live a little,” he encourages her
to explore her sexuality so that she discovers the passion that would enhance her performance of the black swan role. His
passionate kiss and sensual touch awaken Nina’s erotic desire and suggest the sexual awakening of a Snow White kissed by her
Prince as well as the advances of the predator Rothbart in Swan Lake . In an imaginary sexual encounter Nina witnesses between
Lily and Thomas, Thomas transforms into Rothbart.
6Julie Sexeny also describes the ﬁlm as an intra-psychic drama and explains how Erica, Lily and Thomas impact Nina’s
development. She (54) believes that Nina’s identiﬁcation with Lily offers her the opportunity to explore repressed personality
traits. Sexeny uses a different psychological framework, the theories of D. W. Winnicott and Jessica Benjamin. West-Leuer (2017,
p. 1237) offers a Freudian interpretation of the intra-psychic drama and states that the battle between the swans is a repetition of
an earlier sexual experience with caregivers. Jamie Goldenberg (2013, p. 106) views the black swan as “representing human
creatureliness and mortality” and the white swan “as the defensive outcry against this condition” and interprets the ﬁlm as
“reﬂecting the human struggle to overcome limitations associated with mortal existence” (109).
7See a review of Mikhael Baryshnikov’s production of Swan Lake in Croce (1989) essay in “The Story of O.” The New Yorker , May
29, pp. 105–7. Cited in Fass Leavy 217.
8Chernin (57) writes: “We have seen how they (daughters) break down at the moment they might prosper and develop; we have
observed the way they have tortured them-selves with starvation and make their bodies their enemies, the way they attack their
female ﬂesh. This futile attack upon the female ﬂesh through which we are attempting to free ourselves from the limitations of
the female role, hides a bitter warfare against the mother. . . .For what is a woman likely to attack when she cannot express her
anger toward her mother? Isn’t she likely in turning this anger toward herself, to direct it toward the female body she shares
with her mother? In a stunning act of symbolic substitution, the daughter aims her mother-rage at her own body.”
9According to Dr. Dolores Malaspina, a professor of psychiatry, Nina’s symptoms resemble those of a severely neurotic, obsessive-
compulsive patient with features of borderline personality disorder who suffers from mini-psychotic episodes. Her harrowing
visions are fantasies, not hallucinations. Rachel Loewy, assistant adjunct professor of psychiatry, believes that her hallucinations
and fantasies suggest that she may have lost touch with reality altogether. She notes that stress can trigger a psychotic episode.
See Marc Siegel’s article. (Siegel 2011) Stefan Schubert discusses Nina’s unstable identity.
10Stefan Schubert analyzes the “narrative instability” of the ﬁlm because of the “internal focalization” of events through Nina’s
point of view. Goldenberg also views Nina’s death as bestowing on her a type of immortality. (Schubert 2013)
11Goldenberg (112) states, “Otto Rank describes in Beyond Psychology (1958) how in 19th century literature it became common for
the double to represent the mortality of the protagonist. He points to Dostoyevsky’s The Double as well as Poe’s William Wilson
and Robert Louis Stevenson’s Dr. Jeykll and Mr. Hyde . . . ”
12The white screen gets replaced with a black one when the credits roll. Schmiesig discusses the symbolism of colors in Grimms’
fairy tales. Whiteness represents “freedom from outdoor toil and spiritual purity,” (Schmiesing 2016) blackness usually indicates
enchantment (225), but also can refer to disease, death and the underworld (219). Red, white and black are used in folk tales
to symbolize women with red being associated with blood and fertility. Marston (703) states that white can be associated
with pathology.
13Marston (2015, p. 707) states: “The professional standing of Nina and Beth in Black Swan ’s ballet company parallel that of the
two stars in relation to the Hollywood industry, with Portman as a younger, more bankable alternative to the older star.”
14Sandy Hotchkiss (2003, p. 77) describes narcissists’ all or nothing attitude: “if they are not better than, then they are worthless.”
15Of course, fairy tales contain not only passive princesses who are woken up by a prince’s kiss, but also pro-active heroines such
as Gretl in “Hansl and Gretl.”)
16Marston (703) notes that the chiaroscuro lighting, a technique that creates bold shadows and strong divisions between dark and
light areas in the frame, was a visual style used in German Expressionist ﬁlms and contributes to the ﬁlm’s sinister mood.
17Vignoles-Russell discusses interiority of perspective in this ﬁlm.
References
Bacchilega, Cristina. 1997. Postmodern Fairy Tales: Gender and Narrative Strategies . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bargar, Pavol. 2018. “I felt it . . . it was perfect”: Apollo, Dionysus, Christ and Black Swan. Communio Viatorum 60: 313–33.
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 17 of 18
Bettelheim, Bruno. 1977. The Uses of Enchantment: The Meaning and Importance of Fairy Tales . New York: Random House.
Bettelheim, Bruno. 1996. The Struggle for Meaning. In Folk and Fairy Tales , 2nd ed. Edited by Martin Hallett and Barbara Karasek.
Peterborough: Broadview Press, pp. 306–24.
Bignall, Simone. 2013. Black Swan, Cracked Porcelain and Becoming Animal. Culture, Theory, Critique 54: 121–38. [CrossRef]
Bronfen, Elisabeth. 1992. Over Her Dead Body: Death, Femininity and the Aesthetic . Manchester: Manchester UP .
Chernin, Kim. 1991. The Underside of the Mother-Daughter Relationship. In Meeting the Shadow:the Hidden Power of the Dark Side of
Human Nature . Edited by Connie Zweig and Jeremiah Abrams. Los Angeles: Jeremy Tarcher, pp. 54–58.
Croce, Arlene. 1989. The Story of O. The New Yorker , May 29, 105–7.
Diamond, Stephen A. 1991. Redeeming our Devils and Demons. In Meeting the Shadow: The Hidden Power of the Dark Side of Human
Nature . Edited by Connie Zweig and Jeremiah Abrams. Los Angeles: Jeremy Tarcher, pp. 180–86.
Dollar, Steve. 2010. Swan Song Schizophrenia: Aronofsky Examines the Space between Ballet and Madness. The Wall Street Journal ,
November 26.
Downing, Christine. 1991. Sisters and Brothers Casting Shadows. In Meeting the Shadow: The Hidden Power of the Dark Side of Human
Nature . Edited by Connie Zweig and Jeremiah Abrams. Los Angeles: Jeremy Tarcher, pp. 65–69.
Fass Leavy, Barbara. 1994. Search of the Swan Maiden: A Narrative on Folklore and Gender . New York and London: New York UP .
Freud, Sigmund. 1982. Das Unheimliche. In Studienausgabe: Psychologische Schriften . Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Verlag, vol. IV ,
pp. 241–74. First published 1970.
Gilbert, Sandra, and Susan Gubar. 2000. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Nineteenth Century Literary Imagination . New Haven: Yale UP .
Goldenberg, Jamie. 2013. Black Swan/White Swan: On Female Objectiﬁcation, Creatureliness, and Death Denial. In Death in Classic
and Contemporary Film: Fade to Black . Edited by Daniel Sullivan and Jeff Greenberg. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan, pp. 105–17.
Hotchkiss, Sandy. 2003. Why Is It Always about You? The Seven Deadly Sins of Narcissism . New York and London: Free Press.
Jung, Carl. 1970. After the Catastrophe. In Collected Works . Princeton: Bollingen, vol. 10.
Kracauer, Siegfried. 2004. From Caligari to Hitler: A Psychological History of the German Film , 2nd ed. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton UP .
First published 1947.
Lüthi, Max. 1996. The Fairy Tale Hero: The Image of Man in the Fairy Tale. In Folk and Fairy Tales , 2nd ed. Edited by Martin Hallett and
Barbara Karasek. Peterborough: Broadview Press.
Macauley, Alistair. 2011. The Many Faces of the ‘Black Swan’: Deconstructed. The New York Times , February 10.
Marston, Kendra. 2015. The Tragic Ballerina’s Shadow Self: Troubling the Political Economy of Melancholy in Black Swan .Quarterly
Review of Film and Video 32: 695–711. [CrossRef]
Maslin, Sarah. 2011. Farewell to the Celebrity Beat. The New York Times , January 9, p. 5.
Mieder, Wolfgang. 2008. Anti-Fairy Tale. In The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Folktales and Fairy Tales . Edited by Donald Haase. Westport
and London: Greenwood Press, vol. 1, p. 50.
Ng, David. 2010. They know the dance for ‘Black Swan’ well; Is the movie realistic? The Los Angeles Times , December 7, p. 1.
Paglia, Camille. 2006. Break, Blow, Burn . New York: Random House.
Pilinovsky, Helen. 2009. The Complete Tales of Kate Bernheimer: Postmodern Fairy Tales in a Dystopian World. In Fairy Tales
Reimagined: Essays on New Retellings . Edited by Susan Redington Bobby. Jefferson and London: McFarland & Co., pp. 137–52.
Propp, Vladimir. 1979. Morphology of the Folktale , 2nd ed. Translated by Laurence Scott. Edited by Louis A. Wagner. Austin: University
of Texas Press. First published 1968.
Rank, Otto. 1971. The Double . Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.
Rushdie, Salman. 2021. The Books We Truly Love. The New York Times , May 30.
Sanford, John. A. 1991. Parenting and your Child’s Shadow. In Meeting the Shadow: The Hidden Power of the Dark Side of Human Nature .
Edited by Connie Zweig and Jeremiah Abrams. Los Angeles: Jeremy P . Tarcher, pp. 58–60.
Schmiesing, Ann. 2016. Blackness in the Grimms’ Fairy Tales. Marvels and Tales 30: 210–33. [CrossRef]
Schubert, Stephan. 2013. ‘Lose Yourself’: Narrative Instability and Unstable Identities in Black Swan .COPAS: Current Objectives of
Postgraduate American Studies 14: 1–16.
Sexeny, Julie. 2015. Identiﬁcation and Mutual Recognition in Darren Aronofsky’s Black Swan. In Embodied Encounters: New Approaches
to Psychoanalysis and Cinema . Edited by Agnieszka Piotrowska. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 51–59.
Siegel, Marc. 2011. Medicine: The Unreal World: ‘Swan’s delusional depictions. The Los Angeles Times , February 14, 3.
Tolkien, John Ronald Reuel. 1996. On Fairy Stories. In Folk and Fairy Tales , 2nd ed. Edited by Martin Hallett and Barbara Karasek.
Peterborough: Broadview Press, pp. 263–94.
Turan, Kenneth. 2010. Movie Review: “It’s tutu much: Darren Aronfosky’s ‘Black Swan’ is a ﬂat-footed potboiler”. The Los Angeles
Times , December 3, p. 1.
Twenge, Jean M., and W. Keith Campbell. 2009. The Narcissism Epidemic: Living in the Age of Entitlement . New York and London: Free Press.
Vignoles-Russell, Alice. 2015. Creating Interiority in Aronofsky’s Black Swan: An Issue of Composition, Space, and Visual Distortion.
Film Matters 6: 32–39. [CrossRef]
von Franz, Marie-Louise. 1964. The Process of Individuation. In Man and his Symbols . Edited by Carl Jung von Franz. London and New
York: Doubleday & Co., pp. 158–229.
von Franz, Marie-Louise. 1987. Shadow and Evil in Fairy Tales . Dallas: Spring Publications.
Humanities 2021 ,10, 86 18 of 18
von Franz, Marie-Louise. 1991. The Realization of the Shadow in Dreams. In Meeting the Shadow: The Hidden Power of the Dark Side of
Human Nature . Edited by Jeremy Abrams and Connie Zweig. Los Angeles: Jeremy P . Archer Press, pp. 34–38.
West-Leuer, Beate. 2017. Black Swan —The sacriﬁce of a prima ballerina: Psychosexual (self-)injuries as the legacy of archaic experiences
of violence. International Journal of Psychoanalysis 98: 1233–44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Woodman, Marion. 1982. Addiction to Perfection: The Still Unravished Bride: A Psychological Study . Toronto: Inner City Books.
Zipes, Jack. 1989. Don’t bet on the Prince: Contemporary Feminist Fairy Tales in North America and England . New York: Routledge.
Zipes, Jack. 2011. The Enchanted Screen: The Unknown History of Fairy-Tale Films . New York and London: Routledge Press.
