Donnie_Darko_Academic
In repo

Looking at Film Form: Donnie DarkoTo better understand how some of these principles of ﬁlm form functionwithin a single movie, let’s examine how they’re used in Richard Kelly’sDonnie Darko. The ﬁlm was a box oﬃce dud in 2001, but it gained criticalacclaim and what has proven to be an enduring cult following after itsrelease on VHS and DVD the next year. This popularity—and intenseaudience interest in the ﬁlm’s sometimes murky meaning—led to therelease of an extended director’s cut in 2004. For consistency’s sake, we willconﬁne our evaluation to the original theatrical release.ContentWhat is the content of Donnie Darko? That’s an interesting questionbecause the search for content is a large part of what makes the movie anabsorbing cinematic experience. Throughout the ﬁlm, events unfold anddetails emerge that force us as viewers to continually reevaluate ourunderstanding of that content. We are repeatedly provoked to ask ifDonnie’s mind- and time-bending experiences are real or simply aprojection of his diagnosed mental illness. Audiences aren’t used toworking so hard for their content; the eﬀort Donnie Darko demandsprobably played a part in both the tepid response it received in theatersand its increased popularity on DVD and VHS, formats that allowed forrepeated viewings. For the purpose of this analysis, let’s keep it as simple aspossible: the movie is about suburban hypocrisy, high school politics,adolescent alienation—and time travel between parallel universes. Thestory centers on a troubled and possibly schizophrenic teenager namedDonnie Darko who is haunted by a mysterious being that compels him toperform acts of retaliatory destruction.
Who and what is Frank?The grotesque bunny ﬁgure, Frank, plays a central role in the Donnie Darko viewingexperience. His ﬁrst appearance complicates expectations about Donnie’s mentalstate, predicts the ﬁlm’s ending, and injects a horror movie mood to what mightpreviously have been assumed to be a conventional troubled teenager story. Frankexists on the border between realism and antirealism. He is a cosmic hallucinationdressed in a shaggy homemade costume; he’s both a messenger from the future andDonnie’s big sister’s boyfriend dressed up for Halloween.ExpectationsThe ﬁrst scenes of most ﬁlms prompt basic expectations that shape anaudience’s engagement with the rest of the movie. These openingmoments set the tone and let us know what style of story to expect.Viewers sense if this is a reliable or an unpredictable world, determinewhether they’re watching serious drama or a playful comedy, and forminstructive opinions about the characters.Most movies establish expectations in order to involve and guide theaudience. Donnie Darko exploits expectations to keep viewers oﬀ balance.The ﬁlm opens with the title character waking from a sound sleep in themiddle of a mountain road—a situation that is simultaneously dangerousand ridiculous. So we’re still not exactly sure what we’re in for as he rideshis bike home and we head into the next scenes: a contentious familydinner erupting in political tension and teenage hostility, followed by aconfrontation between Donnie and his mother in which we realize he isboth in therapy and on medication.At this stage, past movie experience leads us to presume we’ve entereda family drama that will chronicle Donnie’s struggle with mental illness.That night, a strange disembodied voice summons Donnie to sleepwalkout to the front lawn, where he encounters Frank, a tall ﬁgure wearing ashaggy homemade costume topped with a grotesque rabbit mask. Basedon the previous scenes, we assume that we are experiencing thehallucinations of a disturbed mind. And other, more conﬂictingexpectations are in play as well: the absurdity of a man in a rabbit outﬁtmay lead us to expect something comic or at least innocuous. Yet there’ssomething scary about the incongruity of the costume that triggersanxious expectations born of horror movie clowns and dolls. Then Franktells Donnie the world will end in 28 days, 6 hours, 42 minutes, and 12seconds.Now, faced with a precise time frame and speciﬁc outcome, weinstinctively begin to anticipate how this story will conclude, even as wedoubt the reliability (and existence) of the source. The next morning,Donnie wakes up on a golf course and stumbles home, only to discoverthat during his absence a very real jet engine has fallen from the sky andcrashed into his bedroom. This sudden intrusion of the undeniablytangible makes us reevaluate our expectations about what kind of moviewe’re watching, what’s at stake, what is real, and what will happen.PatternsLike most other movies, Donnie Darko uses pattern to convey andcompare simultaneous action, fragment dramatic situations for emphasisand juxtaposition, and establish—and then sometimes subvert—expectations. A sequence that occurs early in the ﬁlm manages to fulﬁll allof these functions. Donnie’s father, Eddie, is driving him home after school;father and son discuss the mysterious origin of the fallen jet engine. Untilits startling conclusion, the scene is presented in a conventional ABshot/reverse-shot pattern: we see Eddie [A] when he speaks, then cut toDonnie [B] for his reaction and response, and so on. On its surface, thepattern presents a practical approach to a two-person conversation ﬁlmedin the cramped conﬁnes of a moving automobile. But the choice providesopportunities for narrative expression as well. Each shot of Eddierepresents the point of view of Donnie, or vice versa. Fragmenting theconversation empowers the ﬁlmmakers to select the best dramaticmoments to concentrate on either character’s dialogue or reaction.This back-and-forth AB pattern continues for seven repetitions—longenough to lull the viewer into a certain complacency. We’re so caught up inthe conversation that we may not notice that we haven’t been provided aview through the windshield. So when the established pattern is suddenlybroken with a shot of the old lady standing in the middle of the street [C],we experience a shock comparable to that of the distracted charactersabout to run her over. This jarring transition also gives special emphasis tothe character it introduces; the lady in the road is Rebecca Sparrow, theone person alive who could have (before she lost her mind) solved themystery of the fallen jet engine.VIDEOPattern in Donnie Darko
CPattern in Donnie DarkoDonnie Darko uses a simple ABABAB pattern to lull viewers into a sort of cinematiccomplacency before jolting our senses. The ﬁfteen-shot sequence shifts back and forthseven times between a shot of Eddie Darko [A] and his son Donnie [B] before a newshot of a woman in their path [C] interrupts their conversation. This jarring break inpattern dramatically visualizes the Darkos’ sudden realization, allows the audience toexperience a shock similar to that of the characters on-screen, and provides a strikingintroduction to a pivotal ﬁgure.Manipulating SpacePattern is also a component of Donnie Darko’s parallel editing sequences.These sequences don’t alternate shot by shot like the car scene, but they doexploit a more general back-and-forth pattern between two simultaneousevents occurring in distinctly separate spaces. By exploiting the cinema’sability to manipulate space, these sequences function in much the sameway as The Godfather’s “baptism and murder” parallel editing sequencedescribed earlier in this chapter. Like that sequence, parallel action inDonnie Darko juxtaposes action that appears disturbingly incongruous,even incompatible, until the pattern of repeated juxtaposition compelsviewers to perceive meaningful connections in the apparent contrasts. Theviewer sees each event in light of the other alternated event and thusvividly experiences the duality of Donnie Darko’s universe.One such sequence intersperses shots of Donnie’s therapist telling hisdismayed parents about their son’s potentially violent hallucinations withshots of Donnie confronting a very real-seeming Frank using a very largeknife. The content of each action undermines the credibility of thealternating other. In comparison to Donnie’s experience, theparent/therapist discussion seems obtuse and oblivious; in light of thetherapist’s diagnosis, Frank’s actual existence is in question. In the twistedworld of Donnie Darko, these two perspectives don’t cancel each other out;they represent an uneasy coexistence between dual realities.Manipulating TimeIt’s only logical that a movie about the distortion of time would exploitcinema’s ability to distort time. In the ﬁlm’s ﬁrst high school scene, theﬁlmmakers employ a relentlessly moving camera shifting between“normal,” fast, and slow motion to introduce and connect all thecharacters associated with the setting. The scene starts in slow motion toshow Donnie bursting out of the bus and entering the school, then spurtsinto fast motion to follow the hypervigilant gym teacher, Kitty Farmer.Dreamy slo-mo returns when the camera pivots to Donnie’s potential loveinterest, Gretchen Ross. In this case, the technique serves as a visualrepresentation of character qualities and state of mind, and it alsoemphasizes the ﬂuid nature of time as posited in the movie’s dual universe.Throughout the rest of the movie, shifts in motion speed will return inshots that transition between scenes to remind audiences that, in theDonnie Darko countdown to the end of the world, time is possiblymalleable, seemingly unpredictable, and certainly unstoppable. Clouds ﬂyacross the sky in time-lapse fast motion. Donnie’s little sister does slow-motion jumps on her trampoline. Sometimes students scurry out of highschool in fast motion, and sometimes the daily ritual is portrayed ingraceful slo-mo.The manipulation of time can also be used to convey a character’sthought process and state of mind. Things, temporally and otherwise, getmore confused and conﬂicted for Donnie until it all goes tragically wrongon Halloween night. At his lowest point, Donnie suddenly realizes that hehas the power to reset everything. The resulting rapid-ﬁre, thirty-seven-shot sequence that conveys the jumble of memories and revelationsﬂooding his consciousness features thirteen images that visualize timeactually reversing itself, an expressive technique that is as straightforwardas playing the shots backward.
6Parallel action in Donnie DarkoThe reality of the alternating events in another notable Donnie Darko parallel actionsequence is not in question, but the juxtaposition—and the simultaneity—is just assigniﬁcant. While the rest of the town is consumed with raptly watching an inanecommunity talent show, Donnie is burning down the mansion of the charismaticmotivational speaker who holds the townsfolk in his sway. The contrast here is lesscosmic and more thematic: the sequence compares and contrasts teenage rebellionwith slack-jawed conformity.Realism, Antirealism, and VerisimilitudeDonnie Darko’s normal world is portrayed with relative realism. Thelocations, sets, costumes, and most of the performances are designed tolook and sound like the real world viewers experience every day—or atleast an aﬄuent suburban version of it. Even Jake Gyllenhaal’s behavior asthe disturbed Donnie is what we would expect from a teenager in hissituation. The ﬁlmmakers have good reason to ground their movie inrealism: this is a story about a mundane existence inﬁltrated by thefantastic. If viewers did not recognize Donnie’s world to begin with, itwould be diﬃcult to identify with his struggle to navigate the bizarrecosmic quest thrust upon him or to fully appreciate the return to normalcyhe ultimately accomplishes.Yet as we explained earlier in this chapter, cinematic realism is not anabsolute value but a broad spectrum. And Donnie Darko intersects thisspectrum at multiple points. The ﬁlm features stylized lighting and editingthat falls outside the realm of pure realism, as do at least two broadcharacters, seemingly included to amplify the ﬁlm’s social commentary:the pompous self-help guru Jim Cunningham and his overzealous discipleKitty Farmer. And Frank is only one of many examples of antirealism (andformalism) that intrude with increasing frequency as the movie progresses:long, ﬂuid tendrils emerge from peoples’ chests; a black vortex sproutsfrom the clouds above Donnie’s house; and Donnie’s ultimate sacriﬁceresets time to the morning the story began.But those antirealist elements do nothing to undermine Donnie Darko’sultimate believability. What makes this achievement in verisimilitude soremarkable is that so little of the ﬁlm’s internal logic is ever entirelyexplained. Even though few viewers can claim to fully comprehend exactlyhow the story’s time loops function, Donnie Darko is a persuasive andengaging movie experience because we believe it when we see it—so muchso that fans can now purchase the (ﬁctional) Philosophy of Time Travelbook that helps Donnie unlock the secrets of the parallel universe, andthey can consult an abundance of websites and published articles devotedto the cult movie and its complex concept.
