Fight_Club_Academic
In repo

Univ ersity of Rhode Island Univ ersity of Rhode Island
DigitalCommons@URI DigitalCommons@URI
Open Access Master 's Theses
2003
SUB VERSION, DEM YSTIFICA TION, AND HEGEMON Y: FIGH T CL UB SUB VERSION, DEM YSTIFICA TION, AND HEGEMON Y: FIGH T CL UB
AS A POSTMODERN CUL TURAL TEXT AS A POSTMODERN CUL TURAL TEXT
Matthew Or toleva
Univ ersity of Rhode Island
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /digitalcommons.uri.edu/theses
Terms of Use
All rights r eser ved under cop yright.
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Ortoleva, Matthew , "SUB VERSION, DEM YSTIFICA TION, AND HEGEMON Y: FIGH T CL UB AS A
POSTMODERN CUL TURAL TEXT" (2003). Open Access Master 's Theses. Paper 1730.
https:/ /digitalcommons.uri.edu/theses/1730
This Thesis is br ought t o you b y the Univ ersity of Rhode Island. It has been accepted for inclusion in Open Access
Master 's Theses b y an authoriz ed administr ator of DigitalCommons@URI. F or mor e information, please contact
digitalcommons-gr oup@uri.edu . For permission t o reuse cop yrighted content, contact the author dir ectly .
SUBVERSION, DEMYSTIFICATION, AND HEGEMONY:
FIGHT CLUB AS A POSTMODERN CULTURAL TEXT
MATTHEW ORTOLEVA
A THESIS SUBMITTED IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT
OF THE REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE DEGREE OF
MASTER OF ARTS
COMMUNICATION STUDIES
UNIVERSITY OF RHODE ISLAND
2003 6tf3ot
p "°' 0 7 ib
<..,.t>OS
ABSTRACT
This thesis questions whether the film Fight Club, as a postmodern text, reaches a
rhetorical goal of critical subversion, and if so, how does it reach this goal? Using a
method of postmodern critical theory, this thesis argues that Fight Club does reach a
goal of critical subversion by parodically installing and subverting modern hegemonic
assumptions and challenging hegemonic cultural practices.
CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ............................................................................. .ii
Chapter
1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................... l
Statement of the Problem
Justification for the Significance of the Study
Literature Review
Methodology
2. DESCRIPTION OF THE FILM FIGHT CLUB .......................... .28
3. ANALYSIS AND DECONSTRUCTION OF FIGHT CLUB ........... 55
4. CONCLUSION ................................................................ 74
5. BIBLIOGRAPHY .............................................................. 83
Ill
CHAPTERl
INTRODUCTION
Statement of the Problem
A rapid change in technology, consumerism and political economy, coupled
with a dissatisfaction with the objective critiques of modernism has led to the cultural
philosophy of postmodernism. Woods (1999) recognizes that "the postmodern is
understandably widely associated with societies in which consumer lifestyles and
mass consumption dominate the lives of citizens" (p. 64). Postmodernism's
philosophical questioning of modernism and hegemonic representations have led to
the development of a new range of rhetorical strategies and aesthetic practices that
seek to subvert the meta-narratives and foundational ideologies that pervade western
society. Woods (1999) identifies several of these strategies and aesthetic practices
noting particularly the use the irony, pastiche, intertextuality, and self-reflexivity
Linda Hutcheon (1988) also identifies parody as being an important strategy in
postmodern texts.
For Best and Kellner (1997) postmodern rhetorical strategies are inherently
subversive. They identify postmodernism as a form of resistance rhetoric in
opposition to the morals of materialistic, consumer society. "Oppositional
postmodernism seeks new forms of resistance, struggle, and social change" (p. 27).
For Woods (1999) postmodernism is identified with "fiction that reflects the social
ethos of late capitalism" (p. 211 ). Within this oppositional framework, postmodern
rhetorical strategies have had a significant influence on all types of art, including film.
Fight Club, the key text for analysis in this essay, I take to be an exemplary
postmodern text that employs postmodern rhetorical strategies and aesthetic practices,
which call into question the predominant materialistic ideology of American culture,
in a period that Fredrick Jameson (1991) calls late capitalism. In this thesis, I consider
the following questions: does Fight Club, as an exemplary postmodern text,
accomplish the critical subversion of hegemony, or does it reinforce the hegemonic
processes that it seeks to subvert? And, if it does in fact accomplish its subversive
goals, how it does so? In order to critique hegemony, postmodern texts endeavor to
expose how hegemony is textually inscribed. And in that exposure is the
demystification of hegemonic rhetorical strategies.
Fight Club offers exceptional insight into the postmodern aesthetic and
illustrates the powerful rhetorical potential of postmodernism. The rhetoric of Fight
Club is highly political and challenges the ideological superiority that has come to
dominate American culture. Sight and Sound magazine celebrates Fight Club stating
that "the film disrupts narrative sequencing and expresses some pretty subversive,
right-on-the-zeitgeist ideas about masculinity and our name-brand, bottom-line-society
ideas you're unlikely to find so openly broadcast in any other Hollywood movie"
(Taubin, 1999, p. 68).
Fight Club is the story of Jack, a thirty-something, white-collar insomniac who
fills the hole where his soul should be with items from IKEA. Jack travels the country
investigating accidents for a major car company. After determining whether or not the
cause of an accident is due to faulty construction, Jack then applies the "formula" (the
calculation used to decide what would be less costly for the company, a recall or
settling the wrongful death claims that would result from the ensuing accidents). If it
is cheaper to settle the lawsuits, no recall is initiated.
Jack is a corporate soldier, wearing an Armani uniform and living a catatonic
existence. Night after night, Jack cleans his condo in place of sleep. His insomnia
eventually leads him to find weekly catharsis in a testicular cancer support group.
Jack cries with other men who all believe that he too has testicular cancer. This serves
as a sedative and Jack is once again able sleep.
However, Jack's sleep is again interrupted by Marla Singer, the chain smoking,
rag doll who shares with Jack the secret that neither of them is really sick. However,
Jack doesn't need the support group any longer. He has found Tyler Durden.
Tyler is everything that Jack wants to be, completely emancipated from the
materialistic world, which has crippled Jack. Tyler is liberated and wants to help Jack
be liberated too. Together they create a new kind of cathartic support group -Fight
Club.
Jack and Tyler's fight club becomes the ultimate antidote for male
emasculation in the 1990's. It is through fight club that Jack, Tyler, and their
followers rediscover that from which they have become disconnected -a place for
physicality, emotional release and self-reality. However, Jack soon finds that fight
club is a product of his own schizophrenia and fractured cardboard life. Marla Singer
becomes Jack's only salvation. Fight Club is a postmodern narrative about a
postmodern existence.
Jack's schizophrenia in Fight Club parallels the fractured nature of
postmodernism. Indeed, postmodernism has produced countless discussions, several
critics and multiple meanings. This fragmented nature is recognized by Waugh (1993)
when she writes that it is "evident that just as there were many postmodernisms, so
must there be a variety of theoretical precursors and historical trajectories" (p. 1 ).
Waugh goes on to state that "Though there are many forms of postmodernism, they all
express the sense that our inherited forms of knowledge and representation are
undergoing some fundamental shift ... " (p. 5). Both Waugh (1993) and Hutcheon
(1988) recognize the contradictions inherent in postmodernism. And although
inherent contradictions may very well be a cause of the fragmented nature of the
postmodern discussion, they are also an important and defining feature. Waugh states
that "it is already apparent that any attempt to 'map' the postmodern will encounter
endless contradictions" (p. 9). Hutcheon suggests "that, in its very contradictions,
postmodernist art might be able to dramatize and even provoke change from within"
(p. 7). This fragmented nature that is at the heart of postmodernism supports the
question that this thesis explores. Does this fragmented nature mean endless chaos, or
can a postmodern text achieve the critical goals of resistance and
change? Are critical postmodern texts doomed to reinforce the processes that they
seek to resist so that the critical resistance of hegemony through its installation
ultimately subverts postmodernism as a critical theory, which itself collapses in a
doubly-ironic solipsism, cynicism or pastiche?
This thesis will be composed of four chapters: Chapter One is a discussion of
postmodernism and its use as a critical method for reading a text and identifies its
particular aesthetic practices and rhetorical strategies; Chapter Two is a description of
the film Fight Club; Chapter Three is an analysis, interpretation and deconstruction of
the film Fight Club; and Chapter Four, the conclusion, which considers the critical
potential and limitations of Fight Club and its broader implications for postmodern
subversive rhetorical strategies in the film.
Justification for the Significance of the Study
There is a fundamental, albeit gradual, shift in our meaning-making processes
and modes of representation that is increasing as a result of changes in culture
(Waugh, 1993). This cultural shift and its corresponding dissatisfactions are
represented and brought into a stark light by postmodern aesthetic practices.
Understanding postmodernism and the way that it functions to deconstruct a text from
within is a vital tool for reve~ling ideological assumptions. Accordingly,
postmodernism becomes a powerful lens through which to view culture and society.
Postmodernism offers a dichotomy for its use. First, postmodern aesthetic
practices and rhetorical strategies can be used to create a subversive cultural text.
Postmodernism as an aesthetic form is powerfully rhetorical because of its innate
element of ironic resistance. Rhetorically, the postmodern perspective leads to texts
that are sharply political, and purposefully subversive of positions of ideological
superiority (Hutcheon, 1988).
The second use of the postmodern perspective is as a critical tool for
examining a text. By applying the postmodern perspective as a tool for analysis, a
critic can identify a text as employing postmodern aesthetic practices and postmodern
rhetorical strategies; or analyze a film outside the postmodern aesthetic and
deconstruct its underlying assumptions and ideologies. As a tool for analysis,
postmodernism is part of the broad tradition of critical theory which utilizes critique as
a method of investigation (McCarthy, 1991). Sonja Foss (1996) identifies
postmodernism as a form of ideological criticism. Foss expounds the potential of
postmodernism as a form of critical theory and its potential to reveal ideological
presumptions when she states:
Postmodernism theories are based on the notion that our culture has moved
into a new phase-one that follows the period of Modernism, which
championed reason as the source of progress in society and privileged the
foundation of systematic knowledge. The new form of society has been
transformed radically by the domination of the media and technology, which
have introduced new forms of communication and representation into
contemporary life. The postmodern society requires new concepts and theories
to address the features that characterize the new era: fragmentation of
individuals and communities, a consumer lifestyle, a sense of alienation,
destabilization of unifying discourses and principles. The postmodern project
is useful to ideological critics in that it provides information about the context
for many contemporary artifacts and suggests the exigence to which many of
these artifacts and their ideologies are responding (Foss, 1996, p. 293).
Foss goes on to state the "when an ideology becomes hegemonic in a culture,
certain interests or groups are served by it more that others -it represents the
perspective of some groups more than others. The hegemonic ideology represents
experience in ways that support the interests of those with more power" (p. 294).
Postmodernism allows an artist or critic to subvert and challenge the hegemonic
ideologies in society. Postmodemism allows a critic to reveal and react to the
ideologies that are inscribed within a text, or challenged by a text. Therefore, the
ultimate aim of a critic using postmodernism as a tool for ideological criticism "is the
emancipation of human potential that is being thwarted by an existing ideology or
ideologies" (Foss, 1996, p. 296).
Fight Club is a film that captures much of the debate and rhetoric of
postmodernism. It is a quintessential postmodern aesthetic text, clearly utilizing and
illustrating postmodern aesthetic practices and rhetorical strategies. Fight Club
represents an emerging genre of socially satirical postmodern film with the potential to
have an impact on the social realities of audiences.
Literature Review
Scholars of many disciplines have written on the subject ofpostmodernism.
Moreover, the discussion is not limited to the United States and has caught the
attention of scholars abroad as well, many from countries that share a similar cultural
character. Discussions on the theoretical implications of postmodernism cover a wide
spectrum from art to geography, from poetry to politics. A full review of all texts on
the issue would require volumes. As such, I will review the important literature that
has an impact on this thesis. Specifically, the basis of postmodernism as a critical
philosophy and method, the postmodern critique of consumerism, postmodernism's
particular capacity for resistance and subversion, and postmodernism in film.
A clear chronology of postmodemism is non-existent, and any claim of such is
readily debated, as Best & Kellner (1997) recognize: "In the realm of philosophy and
social theory, there are many different paths to tum from the modem to the
postmodern, representing a complex genealogy of diverse and often divergent trails, as
the postmodern in tum winds and twists through different disciplines and cultural
terrains" (p. 27). However, despite the lack of a definitive foundational history (nor
the need for one) Best and Kellner (1997) describe a solid philosophical foundation
and identify important theorists in the development of postrnodemism. Best and
Kellner argue that:
[d]efining the features of what has been identified as postmodemity in recent
decades began emerging in the 19th century and that therefore the postmodern
tum in society and cultural represents a radicalization and an intensification of
the modem that generates genuinely novel social and cultural phenomena to
which the term "postmodern" has been applied (p. 44).
The social and cultural phenomena to which Best and Kellner refer are the result of a
gradual shift resulting in a new cultural epoch. The fundamental changes in culture
are reflected in cultural texts, either reinforcing the dominate ideologies or criticizing
them. As such, postmodernism is a descriptive and analytical term (Woods 1999).
The key theorists, identified by Best and Kellner, which first postulated
postmodemism are the existential philosophers Kierkegaard, Heidegger and Nietzche.
Kierkegaard is generally considered the first to begin formulating the notion of
postmodemism with his criticism and rejection of modernism. The rejection of
modernism would later be embraced by other theorists and become a defining
characteristic of postmodemism. Best and Kellner (1997) point out that although
enlightenment values such as liberalism, democracy and reason are still to be
considered important, they go on to state that:
The Cartesian position that reason is the 'essential sustance' of human life, that
it can have absolute knowledge ofreality, and that its purpose is to dispel
ambiguity and unclarity, replacing them with transparency oflogic and truth -
as a grossly inadequate position that fails to acknowledge the dark side of
reason, its repressed and passionate dimension, as well as its limitations and
socio-historical rootedness (p. 7).
Kierkegaard's shift toward postmodemism began with his distrust of the press.
Referring to the press as a "vicious attack dog," Kierkegaard was one of the first to see
that the press is a mass medium that addresses audiences as members of a crowd and
that itself helps "massify society" (Best and Kellner, 1997, p. 43). Kierkegaard
recognizes that the press represents a shift away from the smaller community toward a
mass society. Furthermore, such a change in the fundamental nature of society is apt
to prompt a movement toward a materialistic culture. Best and Kellner (1997) point to
Kierkegaard's recognition of the commodification of the press:
Verging on a materialistic perspective, Kierkegaard also understood the press
as a monopoly power under the control of capital: "A newspaper's first
concern had to be circulation; from the rule for what it publishes can be: the
witness and entertainment without any relation to [genuine] communication.
Kierkegaard interpreted this economic determination in terms of the form and
content of "information," now a salable commodity, and describing its leveling
effects on the individual, who consumes it for entertainment rather than
information value (p. 44).
As such, Kierkegaard understood why the "press delights in scandal and in inflating
trivialities into significant events, thus obscuring and ignoring more important and
significant issues -much as it continues to do today" (Best & Kellner, 1997, p. 44-45).
To Kierkegaard the press was the first sign of postmodemism. His notions of mass
society and commodification, coupled with his belief in the subjectivity of truth and
the fact that he "systematically champions passion over reason" (Best & Kellner,
1997, p. 49), makes Kierkegaard one of the precursors to postmodemism.
Nietzsche also had a great influence on the work of later postmodern theorists.
Best and Kellner (1997) summarize Nietzsche's legacy and complex nature:
Nietzsche's legacy is highly complex and contradictory, and in retrospect
he is one of the most important and provocative figures in the transition from
modem to postmodern thought. His assault on W estem rationalism profoundly
influences Heidegger, Derrida, Deleuze, Foucault, and other postmodern
theorists, leading many to break with modem theory and to seek alternative
theories. Nietzsche himself, however, combines modem, premodem, and
postmodern motifs. Some of Nietzsche's positions, such as the theory of
perspectivism that we just elucidated, are arguably modem concepts that take
its motifs to higher levels but which pave the way for later ruptures with
modem theory (p. 47).
Despite Nietzsche's complexity, many of his ideas were very much
postmodern. His notion of a "multiperspectival discipline," which viewed any subject
of study through several different lens, rejected the belief of a superior science,
method, approach or position (Best & Kellner, 1997). Rather, "from this
multidisciplinary space, the notion of perspectival interpretation gives Nietzsche a
powerful weapon with which to criticize the one-sidedness and reductionism of many
forms of modern theory" (Best & Kellner, 1997).
Nietzsche's skepticism of a preferred, knowing position, expands into his
mistrust of meta-narratives, such as Christianity and capitalism. Nietzsche believed
that Christianity deprived people of "vital life energies and inimical individuality"
(Best & Kellner, 1997, p. 59). Christianity's unequivocal belief in a moral superiority,
which is the cornerstone of much of the religion regardless of faction, was flatly
rejected by Nietzsche.
Nietzsche reasoned the same way about capitalism. According to Best &
Kellner (1997) Nietzsche "loathed what he saw as capitalism's base concern for
merely monetary and bourgeois values, its alienated labor, and its tendency to turn
everyone into industrious ants" (p. 60).
Nietzsche's rejection of positions of epistemological superiority would become
an important part of postmodern theory. Later, when Lyotard announced the rejection
of the grand narrative, it was an echo of Nietzsche's position (Best & Kellner, 1997).
Although much of what Nietzsche criticized was what he believed to be
modem cultural tendencies, in fact, he was criticizing postmodern tendencies.
Nietzsche saw cultural tendencies that were taking place in the gray cultural area
between modernism and postmodernism. Nietzsche's theories were developed in the
shift of modernism and postmodemism. Best and Kellner place Nietzsche's views in
perspective:
Nietzsche believed that modem society had become so chaotic, fragmented,
and devoid of "creative force" that it had lost the resources to create a vital
culture and that ultimately, modem society greatly advanced the decline of the
human species that had already begun early in Western history. In Nietzsche's
view, two trends were evident that were producing contradictory processes of
massification and fragmentation -whose extreme consequences would be a
central theme of postmodern theory. On the one hand, modem society was
fragmenting into warring groups, factions, and individuals without any
overriding purpose or shared goals. On the other hand, it was leveling
individuals into a herd, bereft of individuality, spontaneity, passion, or
creativity. Both trends were harmful to the development of the sort of free,
creative, and strong individuality championed by Nietzsche, and he was
sharply critical of each (Best & Kellner, 1997, p. 57).
Nietzsche's legacy and influence on postmodern theory is profound. He laid the
foundation for much of postmodern theory today and influenced several other
important theorists, including Heidegger.
"Heidegger combines Nietzsche's radial critique of modernity with a nostalgia
for premodem social forms and a hatred of modem technology, which he sees as
producing new forms of domination" (Best & Kellner, 1997 p. 74). Heidegger's main
criticism was leveled at technology. Best and Kellner state that for Heidegger "the
critical focus shifts from the existential structure of individual existence and modem
society, to modem technology, which produces a Gestell, a conceptual framework that
reduces nature, human beings, and objects to a 'standing reserve', as resources for
technical exploitation" (Best & Kellner, 1997 p.74).
A review of the work of Kirkegarrd, Nietzsche and Heidegger lay a
fundamental foundation of postmodern theory. A key element of these, as already
discussed, is the rejection of cultural meta-narratives based on a false sense of
objective, epistomlogical superiority. The criticism of meta-narratives is a
fundamental feature of postmodemism and it is a criticism that is often a major
thematic feature of any critical discussion of postmodernism as well as postmodern
aesthetic texts.
Capitalism is a grand narrative that is very often challenged by postmodern
texts. Kirkegarrd, Nietzsche and Heidegger are all highly critical of consumerism and
rampant capitalism. However, one work that is near canonic that speaks to the idea of
capitalism is Fredric Jameson's Postmodernism, or The Cultural Logic of Late
Capitalism. To Jameson postmodemism is intrinsically tied to economics, particularly
capitalism. Walsh (1990) comments that "Jameson proposes that postmodemism is
the third great cultural transformation within the history of capitalism, corresponding
to ... the third industrial revolution, that of the computer." Jameson notes:
"postmodern culture is the internal and superstructural expression of a whole new
wave of American military and economic domination. The underside of culture is
blood, torture, death and terror" (p. 5). Jameson's belief in Marxism surely fuels his
attack on the American military-industrial complex. Jameson's postmodern America
is a post-industrial, consumer, media driven, information technology based society; a
society that is based on rampant capitalism and the commodification of everything,
which has lead to mass culture, even within art.
Jameson has been criticized for using postmodernism to attack American
capitalism in arguing in favor of a Marxist critique (Jameson, 1991). One could easily
undertake a postmodern assault on Marxism, as Marxism is also a grand narrative.
Marxism may in method be diametrically opposed to capitalism, however its position
of sociological and philosophical superiority mirrors that of capitalism and its political
economic superstructure. Marxism has itself brought eras of blood, torture, death and
terror. It would be a mistake to situate postmodernism in any specific economic camp.
As postmodernism is primarily a language based, skeptical, anti­
epistemological philosophy of the West, it makes sense that its lens has been directed
at capitalism, one of the West's dominant ideologies. Because capitalism is viewed as
a dominant ideology in America, American postmodern texts often challenge and
deconstruct capitalism and its practices. Despite criticisms and Jameson's other
critical motives, his propensity to connect postmodernism and a consumer-based
capitalism is well founded. Woods (1999) summarizes the position well:
I say "consumer" deliberately, because popular culture is extricably linked to
the commodification of our lives, the commercial exploitation of our leisure
time, and the reliance upon a surplus income to indulge these fabricated
cultural desires. Everything is commodified and this process is constantly
reinforced by a barrage of television advertising. The postmodern is
understandably widely associated with societies in which consumer lifestyles
and mass consumption dominate the lives of citizens (p. 21 ).
Thematically, a critical and subversive assault on capitalism is very often a key
part of postmodern texts. It is certainly a key theme in Fight Club. Fight Club, like
all postmodern texts, is critical of a grand narrative or position of epistemological
superiority; whether capitalism, science, or some other domineering philosophy. The
seeds of such a critical approach lay in the postulations of the early postmodern
theorists previously discussed.
Postmodern philosophy is one of critical cultural resistance. The resistant
nature of postmodernism is reflected in cultural texts and rhetorical strategies and
corresponding aesthetic practices which ultimately seek to advocate the postmodern
position and have a political purpose. That is to say postmodern texts are indeed
purposeful stories.
Patricia Waugh (1993) reinforces postmodernism's narrative nature and states
that postmodernism "still carries with it, wherever it goes, the idea of telling stories"
(p. 2). Waugh (1993) regards "postmodernism as a theoretical and representational
mood, developing over the last twenty years and characterized by an extension of what
had previously been purely aesthetic concerns into the demesne of what Kant had
called the spheres of the cognitive or scientific and practical moral" (p. 1). By seeing
the postmodern as a theoretical and representation mood, Waugh allows us to
appropriate the language of postmodernism and use it as a critical tool without
complete denunciation of our systems of knowledge and discourse. Thus, Waugh
reinforces the efficacy of the postmodern "mood," and underscores a useful
vocabulary for considering postmodern aesthetic practices.
Having a narrative nature and being described as a mood, postmodemism takes
on the characteristics of other forms of narrative. Many postmodern theorists would
have us believe that this is not the case. Some theorists would have us believe
postmodemism represents a form of "anti-narrative," chaotic in nature, and void of all
theoretical structuralism. This is simply not the case. Postmodemism is necessarily
rhetorical. Subversion, parody and resistance to particular cultural practices require an
ideological position. Hence, postmodernism also represents an ideological position.
Like many, Waugh (1993) voices dissatisfaction with modernity and
enlightenment representations of knowledge. She rejects the pretense of objectivity
and states "there is no position outside of culture from which to view culture" (p. 5).
She also recognizes the underlying economic horrors of modernism and underscores
that "knowledge and representation are undergoing some fundamental shift: modernity
may be coming to an end, strangled by its own logic, or rendered exhausted by
economic changes which have propelled us into a new age of information" (p. 5).
Waugh recognizes the "strategies of internal disruption; parody, dis sensual language
games" and "poetic irony" as being part of the postmodern mood (Waugh, 1993, p.
6). Such postmodern aesthetic practices are the fundamental elements of postmodern
rhetorical strategies.
Best and Kellner (1997) point out that as an aesthetic practice the postmodern
text "seeks new forms of resistance, struggle, and social change" (p. 125). Gone is the
modem notion of art for art's sake. Postmodemism emerges as a mode ofresistance
to the economic, political, and social manifestations of modernism's epistemological
imperialism. Best and Kellner affirm the notion of postmodern aesthetic practices and
recognize the use of pastiche, irony, and alternative forms of narrative. These
aesthetic practices are used to question and rethink the modem claims of objectivity
and knowledge articulated often in modem texts (Best & Kellner 1997).
Because the cultural criticism and ideology of postmodemism often points a
critical finger at "high art," postmodemism has been strongly associated with pop
culture. Woods (1999) points out that "popular culture has always been established in
opposition to the puritan ideology of aesthetic purity and highbrow intellect in
modernist culture." Woods goes on to recognize "that popular culture offers positions
from which a politics of cultural resistance may be formed" and that "it is perhaps the
theoretical work of Antonio Gramsci which prepared the way for a postmodern
conception of culture" (Woods, 1999, p. 135). Woods clearly understands the
resistant nature of postmodemism, placing it as the offspring of Gramsci' s theories of
hegemony. Woods articulates a position, shared by many postmodern theorists, which
identifies pop culture as ideological, politically sharp and rhetorically subversive.
The aesthetic practices of postmodern texts are a reflection of a postmodern
mood that has developed in all parts of society. Linda Hutcheon (1988) underscores
the inescapably politicalness of the rhetorical strategies of postmodern aesthetic
practices, arguing that postmodemism brings "the contradictions of modernism in an
explicitly political light" (p. 24). Postmodernism "foregrounds the process of
meaning-making in the production and reception of art .... "(p. 10). Hutcheon also
states that "another consequence of this far-reaching postmodern inquiry into the very
nature of subjectivity is the frequent challenge to traditional notions of perspective,
especially in narrative and painting" (p. 11). Woods points out that "postmodern
fiction is rather an on-going process of problemisation or subversion ofrealist
(mainstream) aesthetic ideology."
As postmodern philosophy fundamentally challenges existing dominating
ideologies, postmodern aesthetic practices challenge conventional storytelling while
disrupting our fundamental understanding of cultural practices. McClure and McClure
(2001) state that "[P]ostmodern aesthetic practices tend to cast into stark relief the
rhetorical pretenses of our meaning-making process" (p. 82). Particular aesthetic
features are visible in postmodern cultural narratives. Woods (1999) recognizes
several, of what he calls, key characteristics of postmodern film, which includes "a
pastiche of other genres and styles, not just imitating their look but alluding to famous
scenes or cinematic styles" (p. 211).
Parody is also a key aesthetic practice that is associated with postmodernism.
Gottsman (1990) states that "[P]arody ... opposes dominant metaphors, those social,
political, economic, expressive conventions that always threaten to choke off
individual creativity and cultural vitality" (p. 1 ). Several scholars indicate that parody
is a key element in postmodern texts. Hutcheon's work on parody is often cited and
Gottesman states that "perhaps the single best source for understanding the potential
contribution to film study of a panel on parody is Hutcheon's, A Theory of Parody:
The Teaching of Twentieth Century Art Forms. She defines parody as imitation with
critical ironic distance, whose irony can cut both ways. Gottesman sums up parody as
a key component in postmodern film stating:
Film parody had been both an aspect of film's self-reflexivity and of film's
address to the moral, political, and social world external to itself. From its
beginnings, then, film history reveals in film parody a double record of its
consciousness of itself ( and other art forms) and of the world in which it is
situated. Parodic films have addressed every political, economic, religious,
psychological, racial, sociological and conceptual issue of the twentieth
century (p. 2).
Parody and irony are not unique to postmodern texts and were strategies used
by premodem and modem writers and artists long before there was any postulation of
postmodemism. Voltarie makes use of parody in Candide, as does Chaucer in The
Canterbury Tales. However, to Hutcheon postmodern art forms "share one major
contradictory characteristic: they are all overtly historical and unavoidably political,
precisely because they are formally parodic" (Hutcheon, 1988, p. 23). Hutcheon
further argues that:
[P]ostmodemism is a fundamentally contradictory enterprise: its art forms (and
its theory) at once use and abuse, install and then destabilize convention in
parodic ways. Self-consciously pointing both to their own inherent paradoxes
and provisionality and, of course, to their critical or ironic re-reading of the art
of the past (Hutcheon, 1988, p. 23).
McClure and McClure (2001) consider Hutcheon as well and draw from her in
an analysis of Zelig, and state that "we seek to expand and develop an understanding
of how irony, in the form of antithesis, rhetorically functions enthymematically to
subvert the conventions of documentary form" (p. 82). They focus on antithesis as a
form of irony used to subvert the conventions of the meaning making process at work
in documentary form. McClure and McClure argue that in Zelig, postmodern parody
functions in the form of antithesis, and that this "antithesis is subsumed under
comparison, in which contrary thoughts meet and whose purposes are embellishment,
negation, abridgement, and vividness" (p. 83).
Kinder (1990) states that "[C]haracters function as double agents of the parodic
project; rather than unified subjects who invite emotional identification, they are
ambivalent signifiers whose meanings slide between the two signifying systems,
revealing both the continuity and distance between them" (p. 12). And Perlmutter
states that "parody's primary target, the disruption of accepted social dicta, is
accomplished by hetroglossia, an interaction of contending social discourses -the
languages, ideologies, and individual speech types that characterize different social
classes, occupations, belief systems, and geographic regions." Cleary ironic parody is
a primary part of postmodernism's subversive strategies.
The subversive strategies of postrnodernism exist in several different types of
cultural texts. However film not only serves as a powerful medium for subversive
postmodernist ideas, but it is itself intimately involved in the postmodern epoch.
Friedberg (1995) whimsically illustrates how film is both a cause and product of the
postmodern slide. "Our taverns and our metropolitan streets, and offices and furnished
rooms, our railroad stations and our factories appeared to have us locked up
hopelessly. Then came the film and burst this prison-world asunder by the dynamite
of the tenth of a second, so that now, in the midst of its far flung ruins and debris, we
calmly and adventurously go travelling" (p. 59).
Hansen (1995) also considers how the production of film and the business of
Hollywood have been effected by a continuous advance of the postmodern. Hansen
writes:
"Today's postmodern, globalized culture of consumption has developed a new,
and ever more elusive, technologies of power and commodification, to be sure,
operating through diversification rather than homogenization: the worldwide
manufacture of diversity does anything but automatically translate into a new
culture politics of difference. But it has also multiplied the junctures at which
such a politics could -and in many places has -come into existence, in
particular with alternative practices in film and video" (p. 136-137).
Hansen compares the beginnings of cinema with its current postmodern condition and
concludes that "[P]ostmodern media culture seems to be characterized by a similar
opening up of new directions and possibilities combined, however with vastly
enhanced powers of seduction, manipulation, and destruction" (p. 149).
Film theorists Joanne Hollow and Mark Jancovich (1995) identify
postmodernism as a term that "describes both a new aesthetic tradition, first identified
in architecture and later self-consciously or unconsciously developed in the other arts
(what comes after realism and modernism), and a new socio-cultural logic tied to
particular economic structures (what comes after pre-modern and modern societies)"
(p. 113). Hollows and Jancovich (1995) describe postmodemism aesthetic practices as
a product of a "radical shift in American cinema" marked by "a breakdown of
classical storytelling conventions, a merger of previous separated genres, a
fragmentation of linear narrative, a privileging of spectacle over causality, the odd
juxtaposition of previously distinct emotional tones and aesthetic materials" (p. 114).
Accordingly, "Hollywood has entered a period of prolonged and consistent formal
experimentation and institutional flux with a media-savvy audience demanding
consistent aesthetic novelty and difference. As a result, stylistic changes which might
have unfolded over several decades under the studio system have occurred in a matter
of a few years in contemporary Hollywood" (p. 114).
Woods sees postmodern film as a "flattening of history, a style which presents
the past in the present; or a 'retro' cinema, or nostalgia film. Self-reflextivity of
technique. A celebration of the collapse between high and low cultural styles and
techniques" (Woods, 1999, p. 214).
Film scholars are not the only ones interested in the postmodern aspects of
Fight Club. Popular press film critics also recognize the postmodern aesthetic
practices of Fight Club. Janet Maslin, writing for the New York Times (1999)
describes David Pincher's Fight Club as "visionary and disturbing" with a "subject
matter audacious enough to suit his lightning-fast visual sophistication." Chris Hewitt
(1999) describes Fight Club as a "subversive, shamefully hilarious take on
materialism film, that goes over the edge of good taste. His camera seems to be
everywhere, burrowing into garbage cans ... ". Hewitt points out Fincher' s self­
reflexive sense of humor when he points to "scenes that mockingly explain the
mechanics of movie projection and in the moment when Norton cracks 'I'd like to
thank the Academy.'"
Robert Butler (1999) refers to Fight Club as a "breathtaking bit of cinematic
nihilism fueled by anger and irony, unforgiving bleak humor, stylistic slight of hand
and one of the year's most memorable performances" (p. 2). Butler goes on to write
that Fincher and screenwriter Uhls have "fashioned a fierce satire about young men
emasculated by society and how they develop an outlet for all the untapped
testosterone" (p. ?).
And Terry Lawson (1999), writing for the Detroit Free Press, writes that Fight
Club is a "reaction to a civilization built on credit cards and cell phones, where
possession is not just nine-tenths of the law, but the only justification for laws. Ifl
acquire, I exist"(p.3). Lawson applauds Fincher for making a film that makes "the
machinery of modem life look like a Lewis Carroll fantasy. We're forever being
whisked in and out ofradiated rabbit holes and thrown through mirrors of psychic
comprehension" (p. 3).
Any review of postmodernism necessitates a consideration of deconstruction.
Deconstruction comes out of the work of Derrida (Tyson 1999). Deconstruction
allows a critic to strip away the ingrained ideologies found within a text and allows a
critic to reveal underlying assumptions within a text. Tyson (1999) reminds us that
"language is not a reliable tool of communication we believe it to be, but rather a
fluid, ambiguous domain of complex experience in which ideologies program us
without our being aware of them" (p. 241). Because meaning is built into our
language, deconstruction can "improve our ability to think critically and to see more
readily the ways in which our experience is determined by ideologies of which we are
unaware" (p. 241). Deconstruction is a part of the postmodern perspective that allows
a critic to challenge the epistemological assumptions and ideological superiority found
within a text.
Another scholar whose work is important to this thesis is that of Kenneth
Burke. Although Burke is not usually considered in a discussion of postmodernism,
he provides a rhetorical perspective and thus a meta-theoretical rhetorical perspective
that transcends the particular rhetorical strategies deployed by postmodern texts and
provides a valuable vantage point for considering the rhetorical implications of the
film Fight Club (Wess, 1999).
As the elements that have lead to the cultural creation of the notion of
postmodernism continue to intensify, a new postmodern film genre has developed
with an intensely political rhetoric woven through. Fight Club stands to be one of the
benchmarks for this emerging genre and an analysis of Fight Club allows for a fruitful
examination of the rhetorical potentialities and limits of postmodern as a critical
theory.
Methodology
Best and Kellner (1997) have argued that "postmodern concepts are primarily
conceptual constructs meant to perform certain interpretive or explanatory tasks and
are not neutral descriptive terms that define pre-established state of affairs" (p. 24).
Accordingly, as a tool for rhetorical criticism "postmodern concepts are generated as
theoretical constructs used to interpret a family of phenomena, artifacts, or practices"
(p. 24).
Hutcheon (1988) recognizes that a postmodern approach to reading a text must
include an analysis of irony and parody. She states "I think the formal and thematic
contradictions of postmodern art and theory work to do just that: to call attention to
both what is being contested and what is being offered as a critical response to that,
and to do so in a self-aware way that admits its own personality" (p. 13). Hutcheon
(1988) tells us that postmodernism is a "contradictory phenomenon, one that uses and
abuses, installs and then subverts, the very concepts it challenges" (p. 3). A
postmodern approach must involve an analysis of understanding a critique of
hierarchical assumptions by ironically displaying those hierarchies. Hutcheon reminds
us that postmodernism doesn't destroy the assumptions of the past, nor does it claim
some form of epistemological superiority, rather it just calls into question those
assumptions while understanding it also creates a hierarchy and makes claims of
ideology. "All hierarchies are social constructs" (p. 41). Hutcheon also lends a
strong sense of parody to a postmodern reading. Hutcheon states that "parody is a
perfect postmodern form in some senses, for it paradoxically both incorporates and
challenges that which it parodies" (p. 11).
McClure and McClure (2001 ), drawing on Hutcheon, refer to parody as the
"quintessence of postmodern cultural practices that install and then subvert ( often via
the deployment of irony) conventional notions of author, narrator, subject position,
plot, temporal sequence, representation and subjectivity" (p. 82). This is reinforced by
Hutcheon's statement that "typically postmodern, the text refuses the omniscience and
omni of the third person and engages instead in a dialogue between a narrative voice
and a projected reader. Its viewpoint is avowedly limited, provisional, personal" (p.
10). This rhetorical view point is in stark contrast with modernist conventions of
narrative rooted in the Cartesian subject-object split. Moreover, postmodernism
doesn't seek to establish a "transcendent timeless meaning, but rather a re-evaluation
of and a dialogue with the past in the light of the present"(p. 19). Again,
"postmodernist contradictory art still installs that order, but it then uses it to demystify
our everyday processes of structuring chaos, of imparting or assigning meaning" (p.
7).
Demystification is very nearly synonymous with deconstruction.
Postmodernism is a state of deconstructing constructions, or deconstructing ideologies.
There is no true meaning to a text, no imbedded objective truth (Derrida 1978).
Language is not a stable constant that offers a universal understanding (Derrida 1978).
Understanding the fact that language is unstable, and as a result, can install ideologies
of which we are occasionally unaware. Deconstruction helps to reveal these
ideologies, and to reveal the realist and modem assumptions employed in construction
of texts.
As Tyson (199) points out, "for Derrida, the answer is that no concept is
beyond the dynamic instability of language, which disseminates (as a flower scatters
its seeds on the wind) an infinite number of possible meanings with each written or
spoken utterance" (p. 246). Deconstruction then offers us an approach to demystify
language as a portal with an infinite number of views.
Tyson states that deconstruction asks such questions as what voices are not
being heard or are being subordinated? What is not being said? How is identity
destabilized? How do different readings of a text defy the answers and meaning that a
text claims it offers? What ideology does the text promote and how does conflicting
evidence show the limitations of the ideology?
In conclusion, an analysis of the aesthetic practices and rhetorical strategies of
Fight Club will consider the inscription of postmodemism and explore Fight Club 's
potentialities and limits as a critical engagement with the hegemony of realism and
modernism.
CHAPTER2
DESCRIPTION OF THE FILM FIGHT CLUB
Fight Club employs cinematic aesthetic practices and unconventional narrative
and plot sequencing that are often associated with the postmodern genre of film.
Although the film does not play with narrative sequencing to the extent of other films
in the postmodern genre, such as Pulp Fiction or Mmmento, it does in fact break from
the traditional Hollywood motif utilizing subversive filmic properties. In this chapter I
will discuss the plot structure, narration style, intertextual dialogue and visual parody,
and cinematic techniques of Fight Club.
Conventional by some comparisons, Fight Club does employ a plot structure
that differs little from the traditional approach of problem/climax/resolution, albeit in a
fragmented form. Fight Club can be segmented into three parts, each with varying
degrees of violence, physicality and identification. The first part of the film takes the
viewer through Jack's problem and the creation of Fight Club, and develops the
inseparable relationship between Tyler and Jack. The second part of the film has Fight
Club mutating beyond its cathartic purpose into something more ominous -Project
Mayhem. The second part of the film also develops the tension between Tyler and
Jack. The third part of the film centers around the surprising plot twist that reveals
Tyler and Jack are the same person, while also obliterating the deceptively close bond
that had tied them throughout the film.
It should be noted that even though Jack and Tyler are revealed to be the same
person in the film, the following discussion does, by necessity, treat them as two
separate characters, for purposes of analysis. As such, when discussing Tyler Durden,
I am referring to the character portrayed by Brad Pitt, and when discussing Jack, I am
referring to the character portrayed by Edward Norton. Only occasionally is it
necessary to modify this distinction, because there are characters in the film,
particularly Marla, who only know a Tyler, which leads to another important
distinction. Although the film reveals that Tyler is a figment of Jack's imagination, or
more precisely, a part of Jack's psyche, Jack isn't ever identified in the film, nor is the
name Jack used as an identity other than when Edward Norton's character is thinking
in voice-over. Jack denotes the character portrayed by Edward Norton. However, in
the film Tyler Durden is the only identity that the other film's characters know. This
becomes clear during the third part of the film when characters refer to Edward Norton
as Tyler Durden. These distinctions are important parts of the overall plot of the film,
and underscores the incertitude of identity.
Fight Club opens with a roller-coaster camera ride down Jack's brain stem and
winds up at the end of a gun barrel that has been inserted into Jack's mouth. After
discussing the feeling of the gun barrel in his mouth, Jack decides to take the viewer
back in time to the point where the viewer can begin to understand why he winds up in
this rather unfortunate position. At this point we are also introduced to the first person
narrative that is usually associated with postmodern film. A quick cut takes the viewer
back to Jack and his insomnia. The choice of where to land the viewer is an
interesting point, as we find Jack in bed fighting with insomnia. Most standard plot
structures introduce the viewer to a situation being faced by the main character often
just prior to the development of the problem that will eventually have to be addressed
by the characters. Fight Club drops the viewer into an already existing situation,
augmenting the already fractured narrative structure.
Begging for relief and claiming death is at hand, Jack seeks a doctor's help for
his insomnia but finds little sympathy. The doctor refuses to give Jack a narcotic to
help him sleep. He tells Jack that he needs natural sleep, and ifhe thinks he has a
problem he should go to a local cancer support group and see what it's like to have
real problems.
The scene with Jack and the doctor offers the first use of intertextual cinematic
augmentation. While Jack discusses his insomnia with the doctor, a small flash of
Brad Pitt appears for a second on the screen and then disappears. There is a similar
flash when Jack first attends the cancer support group.
On Jack's first encounter with the cancer support group he meets Bob, the ex­
bodybuilder who now has enormous breasts because of hormone therapy. An
androgynous figure, with his high pitch voice and breasts, Bob represents the
embodiment of male emasculation in the late twentieth and early twenty-first century.
Jack opens up and cries on Bob's shoulder and through this cartharsis he is once again
able to sleep. Personal voice-over narrative continues to guide the viewer through the
film. Jack continues going to support groups, the list of groups ever growing, until he
attends a support group of one type or another each night. It is at this point in the plot,
when Jack is finally at rest. Jack can finally sleep, that is until Marla Singer appears.
Marla Singer, portrayed as the chain-smoking, goth/punk nemesis of Jack,
begins showing up at all the same support groups, including his testicular cancer
support group. Jack knows immediately that she is a "tourist" and, like him, there for
alternative reasons. For Marla the morbid goings-on at the support group meetings are
"cheaper than a movie and the coffee is free." Because of Marla, Jack again can't
sleep. He confronts Marla, who turns out to be an aggressive, intelligent woman who
is not going to cower at Jack's insinuations. Jack threatens to expose Marla, and in
response Marla threatens, both confidently and defiantly, to expose him. They decide
to split the various support groups at which both have become regulars. This
arrangement ensures that their paths won't cross. However, Jack asks for her
telephone number and she, in a seductively knowing way, writes it on his hand. This
flirtatious scene begins developing sexual tensions between Jack and Marla.
Although, Jack has had sexual images of Marla in his meditative moments at group
meetings, this is the first sign of interpersonal sexual tension.
The first part of Fight Club establishes Jack's corporate identity. As a recall
coordinator for a major car company, Jack flies from place to place making
determinations based on cost/benefit to the company. Jack discusses his corporate life
in the usual, semi-melodic tone of the first person narrative. As he discusses his work
with another passenger on a flight bound for another investigation, the viewer gets a
glimpse of suicidal wishes from Jack, as he explains how he occasionally hopes for a
mid-air collision. But in an interesting ironic twist, he doesn't want to die to be
released from his tormented life, rather he wants to die because life insurance pays
triple if killed on a business trip. It is the ultimate postmodern epitaph.
Jack's narration also introduces us to the clean, white, prepackaged, single­
serving world of the traveling corporate soldier. The mise-en-scene that Fincher uses
when showing Jack's corporate world is significantly different than the mise-en-scene
he uses when Jack is with Tyler. Dark, vampire-like visions dominate when Tyler and
Jack are together, including scenes during Fight Club. Dank, half-lit rooms, urban
decay, sickly neon glows all spin around Tyler and Jack. In contrast, Jack's button
down world is clean, crisp and tends to be very light and bright.
Jack and Tyler first meet on one of Jack's business trips. The viewer
immediately gets a heavy dose of Tyler and his philosophy; a philosophy that mirrors
that of the postmodemists. Tyler discusses the illusion of safety on an airplane, and
offers an alternative reason for having oxygen drop down in case of emergency,
because it gives passengers a euphoric feeling before death. Tyler is friendly but
direct. When Jack asks what he does for a living, Tyler immediately subverts the
usual business discourse by asking Jack directly "Why? So you can pretend that you
care." Tyler eventually discloses to Jack that he sells soap for a living. He takes out
his brief case and gives Jack a card. Jack notices that Tyler has the exact same brief
case as he, and comments on that fact.
The matching brief case scene is the first of several points in the film that
Fincher gives small hints to the ultimate plot twist that is revealed later in the film.
Such rhetorical tricks allow for a different viewing of the film a second time. On a
second viewing, rather that just a repeat of the film with the only difference being the
viewer knows how the story ends, the viewer finds different readings of the film when
discovering these encoded tricks of the filmmaker. The recent film The Sixth Sense,
also makes use of this subversive technique. Although unlike The Sixth Sense, Fincher
doesn't recap all his little tidbits for the viewer. Only a second viewing of the film can
reveal its secrets. Such a retrospective approach is made easier with the personal
narrative style of postmodern texts, because it offers a narrowed view of past plot
events.
After his initial meeting with Tyler, Jack returns home to find his apartment
blown to bits, and his furniture strewn around the front of his building. Again in the
personal narrative style and with some interesting camera work, Jack explains how
such an explosion might have occurred and how the thick walls of the complex,
designed for those living in close proximity to those who may be hard of hearing and
have to yell, prevented any other apartments from becoming damaged. Jack wanders
amongst the remnants of his catalog life, embarrassed by the fact that his refrigerator
has only condiments inside for the firemen to find. Not sure what to do, Jack first
calls Marla but hangs up without speaking. He then calls Tyler but gets no answer.
Again, Fincher may be employing a glimpse into the film's ultimate plot twist.
Jack gets an immediate call back from Tyler who tells him he "stared 69ed him." This
may not be possible, or seems somewhat improbable with a pay telephone. Also, as
Jack turns as he hears the ring of the telephone, Fincher uses a moving close-up of
Jack which seems to indicate a type of disbelief in the ringing telephone. Soon Tyler
and Jack are drinking beer and discussing life. Again, the viewer gets a strong dose of
Tyler's life philosophy. After outlining his anti-materialist, anti-consumer philosophy,
Tyler offers Jack a place to stay. But he asks Jack to first do him a favor. He asks
Jack to hit him. Jack and Tyler begin exchanging blows and so begins Fight Club.
After pummeling each other for a while, Tyler introduces Jack to his new
home, a run-down, abandoned house. The home is a dark alternative to stark white
suburbia, offering nothing more than dirty mattresses, rusty water, and no television.
It is the perfect place for Tyler and Jack. Stripped of all amenities, after the first
month Jack doesn't even miss television. Jack mentions that he believed the house
was abandoned and that Tyler had moved in as a kind of squatter. The fact that Tyler
just moved into the house like an animal moves into a cave, implicitly underscores the
anti-materialistic sentiment of the film by representing a home that doesn't involve
banks, mortgages or real estate transactions.
At this point in the film, there are two very important plot lines that drive the
film. The first is the growth of Fight Club, and the second is the development of a
relationship with Marla. Jack and Tyler continue to expand Fight Club and scenes of
their fights have more and more on-lookers and eventual participants, until finally Jack
and Tyler move Fight Club into the bottom of a club called Lou's. Fight Club now
has rules, and "the first rule of Fight Club is you don't talk about Fight Club."
As Fight Club grows, Jack, again in voice-over, states that Fight Club only
exists in the hours between when Fight Club starts and when Fight Club ends. He
explains that a person while at Fight Club is not the same person as he is in the outside
world. That's why if you see someone outside of Fight Club, you can't tell him that
he had a good fight because you wouldn't be talking to the same person. This is a
clear indication of the schizophrenic personality of Jack and Tyler. Such a statement
is an admission by Jack that he is not the same person either. However, in Jack's case
the figurative is literal.
Fight Club continues to expand. One night, Jack runs into Bob, from his
testicular cancer support group, and learns Bob goes to Fight Club on Tuesday's. The
fact that there was a Tuesday Fight Club seemed to surprise Jack. Jack goes to the
Saturday night version. It is during this conversation that the first hint of tension
between Jack and Tyler begins to surface. Bob asks if Jack knows that man who
started it, he hears he is a great man. Then he asks, "Do you know Tyler Durden?"
It's clear that Jack feels a stab of jealously as Bob strikes a note in Jack's psyche that
will continue to play through film.
While Fight Club grows, so does a sexual relationship between Marla and
Tyler. This relationship also causes a great deal of tension between Jack and Tyler.
Jack tells the viewer that he and Tyler are like Ozzie and Harriet, while visually
Fincher shows Jack fixing Tyler's tie before leaving the house. The sexual
relationship that develops between Marla and Tyler throws Jack and Tyler's
relationship into a spin. Marla represents the lynchpin in Jack's psyche. It is through
Marla that Fincher reveals Jack's schizophrenia, and in the first part of the film
Fincher again offers some glimpses into what would eventually be an extreme plot
twist.
Jack discovers that a sexual relationship exists between Tyler and Marla very
abruptly. One morning in the kitchen as Jack is drinking morning coffee, he hears
what he believes is Tyler coming into the kitchen. Jack starts saying something to
who he believes is Tyler, and spins in surprise when he is answered by Marla. Of
course to Marla there is no Jack, knowing only the one person named Tyler. Marla's
reality is, after all, quite a bit different from Jack's. Marla's presence completely
unnerves Jack. After Marla leaves, Tyler comes into the kitchen and explains how he
first meets Marla. The story is told as it happened the night before, offering the
viewer a momentary temporal displacement. Marla had called Jack after taking too
many pills and was certain she was dying. Jack, not wanting to talk to her, placed the
receiver on top of the phone while Marla rattles on. Eventually Tyler picks up the
receiver of the telephone. Tyler proceeds to Marla's apartment and convinces her to
leave with him to avoid the police who are responding to her suicide call. Back at the
house, Tyler has his first sexual encounter with Marla.
Of course, a retrospective view of the film would offer a glimpse into a very
surreal relationship that has a profound impact on the plot as well as offering a critical
lynchpin to the film. Although, their seems to be an interesting love triangle
developing in the film, it is really a dyadic relationship between a schizophrenic
character and an odd though rational woman. The viewer does get a glimpse that
Marla is at the line between the reality of Jack and the delusion of Tyler. For instance,
when Jack first sees Marla in the house his surprise in obvious, but when Jack asks her
what she is doing in his house, her surprise equals his. She leaves and Tyler enters.
After discussing Marla's wild side, Tyler makes Jack promise that he would never talk
to Marla about him and if Jack ever breaks his promise then they, Tyler and Jack, are
over. As the first part of the film develops, Marla makes several more visits and they
are equally revealing. During one visit, Marla reaches around and touches Jack in a
very sexually explicit manner. Again, she is surprised by Jack's action. Upon a
second viewing when the ultimate plot is revealed, the fact that Marla is seeing and
speaking with one person is a testament to Pincher's intellect as a filmmaker.
The strain on Jack and Tyler's relationship that is caused by the sexual
relationship between Tyler and Marla also helps create a homoerotic dimension that is
evident between Jack and Tyler. The interplay and ambiguity of sexuality and gender
bending in the film is played out to a large degree between Jack and Tyler. References
to Ozzie and Harriet, Tyler's use of "couple" dialogue such as "it's over between us,"
and Tyler's invitation to Jack to join them in the bedroom to "finish Marla off' crosses
sexual lines of typical Hollywood relationships. While visiting Marla in her
apartment for the first time, Tyler is very playful with a rubber male organ that Marla
has on her dresser. Also, later in the film, Tyler kisses Jack's hand, to which Jack's
reaction is confused but intrigued. The interplay between Jack, Tyler and Marla is a
display of multi-dimensional exploration in identity by Fincher.
It is during the first part of the film that the viewer also discovers that Tyler, as
Jack puts it, is the ultimate guerrilla terrorist of the food service industry and a
pornographic projectionist, as Jack takes the viewer through the life of Tyler. In an
intriguing use of intertexuality and first person narrative, Jack first discusses Tyler as
the projectionist who splices pornographic material into family films. As Jack
narrates and discusses the job of a projectionist Tyler points to the comer of the screen
and points out a "cigarette bum," or the point at which a projectionist knows to switch
reels. Fincher combines the story narrative with industry practices and jargon.
Also, as Jack introduces the viewer to Tyler's food service antics, he does so
by becoming part of the scene. Jack sits at the table while describing, to the camera,
Tyler's job as a bus boy. And Jack has a conversation with Tyler while having a
conversation with the viewer. Fincher uses subversive cinematic effects to help
illuminate Tyler's subversive life.
The first part of the film continues developing the characters and Fight Club as
a cathartic, subversive pass time, until Fincher moves the viewer into the second part
of the film. With a powerful transitional scene, Fincher moves Fight Club and the
viewer out of the basement.
The transitional scene starts in the basement of Lou's and another night of
Fight Club. Tyler is chastising the group because "by the look of all the new faces,
somebody has been breaking the first rule of Fight Club." After growing angry from
the snickers, Tyler begins spewing his philosophy until he is interrupted by Lou and
his bodyguard. Lou wants to know what is going on in the basement of his club.
Tyler explains that they have an understanding with Irv, but Lou doesn't care. Lou
wants everybody to get out, but Tyler interrupts and tells Lou that he and his friend
should join their club. This infuriates Lou who begins hitting' Tyler. But with every
strike, Tyler gets more and more sarcastic, and Lou beats him worse, until finally Lou
stops, deciding that he has broken Tyler. Then in a flash Tyler has Lou on his back and
is spewing blood all over him. Disgusted, Lou "swears on his mother's eyes" that
Tyler and crew can continue to use the basement. Lou runs out screaming.
Tyler is then carried Christ-like to the comer of the room. There he gives his
first home work assignment. He informs everyone that they are to get into a fight with
a stranger and lose. This carries Fight Club out of the basement for the first time and
sends it in a new, darker direction.
The second part of the film begins comically, as the members of Fight Club
venture out and lose their fights with various strangers, including a priest. But, the
action quickly shifts to Jack, sitting in his boss' office telling his boss that "we need to
talk." His boss begins going over the various infractions of some employee code of
conduct, but Jack has a different idea. He decides to blackmail his boss. Jack asks the
hypothetical question of "what do you think the Department of Transportation would
do if they found out that cars role off the assembly line without proper inspection, and
with breaklines that fail at fifteen hundred miles." Outraged, Jack's boss fires him.
However, Jack has a counter offer, "to be kept on as a paid consultant whose job it is
not to tell anyone what he knows about the safety cuts made by the car company. Jack
conveys "this is a job I can do at home."
Further enraged, Jack's boss picks up the phone to call security, but again Jack
has a different idea. He balls his fist, and strikes himself. Stunned, his boss lowers the
phone as Jack beats himself around the room, the whole time shouting out as if it were
his boss doing the deed. Jack yells, "no please" and "not that" as he cast himself
through the air smashing furniture. It is here that Fincher gives the viewer perhaps the
biggest clue throughout the film that Tyler and Jack are one in the same. Moreover,
Fincher offers this clue in a very deliberate and explicit manner. As Jack strikes
himself so hard that he flies through the air, Fincher freezes the frame, and in a voice­
over by Jack the viewer hears "for some reason I thought of my first fight -with
Tyler." Fincher appears to enjoy giving the viewer clues to indicate the ultimate plot
twist that lay ahead, but never does he give more than a curious hint.
Jack crawls over to his boss, kneeling and bloody he once again makes his
offer. But he is interrupted as security officers enter the office and stumbles upon
what looks like a boss beating up his employee. A quick cut has Jack bloody but
smiling, and in a voice-over the viewer is told that Jack and Tyler now have
"corporate sponsorship" and that is how they were able to have Fight Club every
night. Jack also lets us know that Tyler is up to something similar, currently engaged
in a class action suit with the hotel that employs him for the high urine content in the
hotel's soup. A voice-over by Jack at Fight Club has him repenting "I am Jack's
wasted life."
It is during this second part of the film that there is a shift toward a darker tone.
Tyler continues to hand out homework, but things have taken a more violent turn. The
homework assignments now call for vandalism. Soon the viewer sees computer stores
being blown up, the safety instructions on airplanes being replaced by a new version
depicting people dying in a flaming crash. A close up follows with a fast pan of
several newspaper clippings of the different anti-social acts that the Fight Club
members had perpetrated. Next, the viewer sees Tyler and Jack setting the alarms off
on various luxury vehicles, such as Mercedes and Porches, while discussing the
rumors that Fight Club has begun in other cities and asking each other "did you start
that one, no I thought you did." Fight Club is spreading.
Next, Tyler takes Jack into a convenience store and when Jack asks why, Tyler
simply states "homework." To Jack's surprise Tyler pulls the convenience store clerk
out the back door and places a gun to his head. Tyler then takes the clerk's wallet and
informs him that he is going to die. The clerk is, of course, well panicked. Jack is
also panicked. He tries to convince Tyler that what he was doing is wrong but Tyler
pays little attention. After Tyler finds an expired cmmmunity college ID card in the
clerk's wallet, he begins to question him about it, probing him about the life choices
he has made. The clerk reveals that at one time he wanted to be a veterinarian, but
there is too much education required. Tyler asks, "would you rather die in the back of
a convenience store." Tyler then takes the ID card and tells the clerk that he will be
watching and if he "is not on his way to becoming a veterinarian in six weeks" he'll be
dead. And then Tyler lets the clerk go.
Jack is completely shocked by what had just happened. He begins ranting to
Tyler, asking why? Tyler tells Jack how tomorrow will be the greatest day of the
clerk's life. His food will taste better than any before eaten. He will be alive. Tyler
tosses the gun to Jack for examination. Jack discovers that the gun isn't loaded. The
clerk was never in any danger. In a voice-over, Jack celebrates Tyler stating "you got
to give it to him, he had a plan."
The scene with the convenience store clerk stands as an important scene in the
film. It does not represent a turning point of any kind, But it does confirm Tyler's
philosophy ofrhetoric and action. Also, it reinforces the non-malicious nature of
Tyler, as he is at this point in the film. Fincher creates some excitement with this
scene while maintaining the overall attitude of the film.
Fincher also begins to show a softening of Jack's attitude toward Marla. In
another kitchen meeting Marla ensures Jack that she will be gone soon. Jack,
however, says it's ok, and asks if she has still been going to the group therapy
meetings where they first met. Marla tells Jack that Cloe has died. The last time Jack
had seen Cloe, she was a skeleton of a women looking for a last sexual experience
before she died. Jack momentarily reflects on Cloe. He then asks Marla what she is
getting out of "all this." He also asks "why a weaker person must latch on to a
stronger person?" Marla, in rebuttal, asks Jack what he gets out of the relationship and
Jack answers back "it's different with us." Confused, Marla asks with who? Jack than
tries to avoid the conversation, while also questioning the sounds he keeps hearing
from the basement. As he moves to the basement door, Marla harangues him about
continuing the conversation. From the basement Tyler is telling Jack what to say,
"this conversation is over." Again Fincher is giving a clue that Tyler and Jack are the
same person. And that somehow, Marla is the impetus that may reveal this secret.
Marla leaves frustrated and Jack goes into the basement to confront Tyler,
where he finds several bunk beds and soon learns Tyler plans to build an army. Soon
Jack also discovers the first applicant standing on the porch. Tyler informs him that
the applicant stands for three days without food, water or encouragement. Also, Jack
and Tyler continuously harass the applicant. Jack strikes the applicant with a broom
while Tyler watches from a window and Jack, in a voice-over revelation, states that
"sooner or later we all became what Tyler wanted us to be."
One by one the applicants are accepted and they then cut their hair and dress
only in black. Jack isn't really sure why Tyler is building an army until he comes
home one night and finds the troops around the television watching a news report.
The report features a burning building with a big smiley face painted on the side.
Jack, obviously upset, asks what they had done? The troops all look at each other and
then answer, "Sir, the first rule of Project Mayhem is you don't talk about Project
Mayhem." Jack casts a look at Tyler who smiles knowingly and walks away. Fincher
then offers the viewer several quick cuts and shots of different vandalisms. He
accompanies this with a shot of newspaper clippings with headlines of various crimes.
Including one headline with an intertextual parody aimed at Brad Pitt. The headline is
a report of several monkeys being freed from a local zoo, an obvious reference to
Pitt's role in the apocalyptic film Twelve Monkeys.
As Project Mayhem grows, the city police commissioner announces on a
television newscast that the vandalism is linked to some underground boxing clubs
and that the people responsible will soon be apprehended. Fincher then cuts to an
award ceremony of some kind where the police commissioner leaves the table and
goes to the men's room. Tyler and his followers, dressed in waiter whites, are lying in
wait for the commissioner in the men's room. Jack is also there, however, Fincher has
Jack acting unsure, indecisive and clearly subordinated to Tyler. The police
commissioner is assaulted; his hands and feet bound, mouth taped, and an elastic
wrapped around his testicles by a knife wielding foodservice worker. With a narrow
shot of all of them and a close up of Tyler, the scene is set. Tyler tells the
commissioner that he better call off the investigation or else he'll be castrated. In
another example of Tyler expounding the strong rhetoric of the film, he tells the
commissioner "we cook your food, we pick up your garbage, don't fuck with us." The
elastic is then cut from the testicles of the police commissioner in a symbolic
castration.
As Tyler and his followers flee, Tyler instructs the crew to split up and he
directs Jack to go in a different direction then he. Jack is obviously hurt by this and in
a voice-over says "I am Jack's feeling ofrejection." This feeling ofrejection signals
the end of the second part of the film and begins the transition into the third and final
part of the film with a cut to Jack circling one of the soldiers of Project Mayhem in the
familiar basement setting of Fight Club.
Jack beats the solider mercilessly in one of the most graphic and openly violent
scenes in the film. The crowd stands silent as Jack causally gets off the beaten man
and shrugs. Tyler asks Jack "when did you become psycho boy?" Jack replies "I
wanted to destroy something beautiful." Disgusted Tyler leaves giving orders to take
the beaten man to the hospital. Then he and Jack exit to a waiting town car that has
been plucked from airport parking.
Upon entering the car Tyler wants to know if there is a problem. Jack tells
Tyler that he is upset because Fight Club was theirs, they started it together and now it
is all Tyler's. The conversation starts to get heated as Tyler, again preaching the hard
line, angrily insists that Fight Club isn't about them, it is bigger than they are. Jack
still insists that he should be in the know. Tyler then barrages Jack with a series of
corporate euphemisms: "Do you want me to email you, put it on your item action
list?" Tyler lets go of the steering wheel and Jack jumps for it. "Look at you, you're
fucking pathetic," screeches Tyler. But Jack is focused on the two on-coming trucks.
Then Tyler reveals an important plot dynamic when he says "why do you think I blew
up your condo? Hitting bottom isn't a weekend retreat, it's not a seminar, you need to
let go and forget about trying to control everything."
A cool look comes over Jack's face as he capitulates. Tyler again releases the
steering wheel and after some weaving the car careens off the road and goes over an
embankment. Fincher presents the car crash in a dreamy kind of sequence until he
picks up speed again and everyone except Jack is climbing out of the car bleeding and
injured. Jack is knocked unconscious from the impact.
Cut to another dream like shot where Jack can vaguely see Tyler squatting over
him, and he can hear Tyler's voice talking about a future distopia-a future free of
consumerism and capitalism, where people cure venison, and grow com. When he
wakes, Tyler is gone. He searches for Tyler, calling his name with a kind of
questioning tone, but Tyler is not there. Jack's awakening and Tyler's disappearance
mark the beginning of the third and final part of the film.
Jack, apparently recovered from the injuries sustained in the car wreck, looks
around the house but finds no sign of Tyler. What he does find is a number of files
and drivers licenses of Project Mayhem members, a shot designed to indicate the size
and scope of Project Mayhem. The files he finds, containing information about
various credit card companies that are targets of Project Mayhem, will be very
significant as the plot unfolds. As Jack moves through the house he finds it has taken
on a life of its own-driven by Project Mayhem. Tyler's army is busy with various
activities, including making soap. In a voice-over Jack confesses his belief that Tyler
has dumped him, another homoerotic piece of dialogue found in the film. Also in
voice-over, Jack offers the viewer a bit of Hollywood suspense, musing "what comes
next in Project Mayhem, only Tyler knows."
Jack eventually wanders outside and encounters Marla who comes to the house
looking to speak to Tyler (again, it is important to reiterate that to Marla Jack and
Tyler are the same person). She asks if she could come in side. Jack responds by
telling her that Tyler isn't there. Marla can only offer a confused, "What?" Jack,
irritated, starts to respond to Marla condescendingly "Tyler not here, Tyler gone."
Marla leaves stunned, completely confused.
Jack returns into the house to find a commotion. Several members of Project
Mayhem come running into the house yelling "Someone's been shot! Bob's been
shot!" Bob is placed on the table and in a series of quick cuts the other members of
Project Mayhem that were involved explain what had happened. It is revealed that
during assignment "Latte Thunder," in which a piece of modem art and a chain
coffeehouse would be destroyed, the police shot Bob in the head. Jack is completely
distraught and lashes out at the others. Someone mentions burying Bob quickly. Jack
now becomes highly irate. The others remind Jack that if someone is killed in Project
Mayhem the body is to be disposed of. Jack angrily addresses the group stating that
this is a person and his name is Robert Pulson. Jack is reminded that in Project
Mayhem nobody has a name. But again Jack states that the man has a name and it is
Robert Pulson. Then a member speaks out, "I understand sir, in death we have a
name. His name is Robert Pulson." Over Jack's objection the group begins chanting
"His name is Robert Pulson!" Jack can no longer take it and starts ranting to himself
"I have to find Tyler, I have to find Tyler." He goes into Tyler's room and rummages
through his belongings, finding plane tickets from all over the country. He sets out to
find Tyler.
Jack jets off across the country looking for Tyler. The cinematic techniques
used by Fincher correspond to the desperate pace of the plot. Quick cuts of planes
taking off and landing, Jack in and out of different airports gives a fast and anxious
pace. Fincher uses several voice-overs as the viewer follows Jack on his quest.
Fincher also begins to give the viewer more explicit hints toward the ultimate plot
twist. The first of which takes place when Jack goes into a bar looking for Tyler. Jack
is talking to several people that work in the bar and asks if Tyler had been there. After
some prodding, the bar tender finally says "Sorry, I can't help you sir." Then the bar
tenders winks at Jack.
As Jack continues, he encounters people that speak of Tyler like a god, and one
dry-cleaning clerk who struggles to uphold the first rule of Fight Club. Jack sees Fight
Clubs in alleys and walks dank basements where a Fight Club had been the night
before, when he comments that "Tyler had been busy setting up franchises."
Again, Fincher moves the viewer toward the shocking plot twist, this time
taking away all but the slightest bit of doubt. Jack goes into another bar and stops
when he hears the kitchen staff chanting "His name was Robert Pulson, his name was
Robert Pulson." Jack turns when the bartender asks "welcome back sir." Jack asks
"Do you know me?" Puzzled, the bartender asks "Is this a test sir?" Jack assures the
man that it's not a test. The bartender tells Jack "You were in here last Thursday,
asking how security was. It's fine sir." Jack then asks the bartender 'Who do you
think I am?" The bartender replies after again inquiring about the possibility of a test,
"You're Mr. Durden, you're the one that gave me this" and the man holds up the same
bum as Jack received when making soap with Tyler. Another voiceover from Jack,
"Please return your chair to the upright position."
Jack is now desperately confused. He returns to his hotel room and calls
Marla, asking her if they ever had sex. Jack is searching for something. He is trying
to put together the last pieces in Fincher' s puzzle of a plot. Marla asks "Do you mean
have we had sex or made love?" making Jack further dance for his answer. Marla
finally unlocks the mystery for the viewer "You fuck me then snub me, you love me
then hate me, you show me your sensitive side then you tum into a total asshole, is
that a pretty accurate description of our relationship Tyler?" Fincher gives us another
voice-over in Jack's voice "We have just lost cabin pressure."
Then to confirm what Jack and the viewer just heard, Jack asks Marla to say his name.
Marla exclaims "TYLER DURDEN! TYLER DURDEN!"
Marla hangs up the phone and Jack turns at the sound of Tyler's voice. There
sitting in front of Jack is Tyler, only he looks somewhat different, his hair cut very
short, wearing odd clothing. Tyler is upset, chastising Jack for breaking his promise
and talking to Marla about him.
Jack presses Tyler to tell him what's going on, asking the question "why do
people think I'm you?" Tyler explains everything to Jack and to the viewer. Jack
wants to break free from who he is. He wants to look like Tyler, talk like Tyler, he
wants to be "smart, capable, and confident." Tyler explains that little by little Jack is
being taken over by Tyler Durden, and Fincher clears up any ambiguity of the
question of Jack's identity completing a brilliantly administered plot twist.
Fincher supports Tyler's explanation with a series of flashback fast cuts and
cinematography that looks like it was filmed on liquid. Fincher shows Jack in various
scenes in the film that originally had Tyler in that position. The viewers sees Jack
over the police commissioner speaking the words that Tyler had originally spoken,
Jack barking out the rules of Fight Club, Jack fighting himself in a parking lot absent
Tyler, and Jack yelling Tyler's rhetoric at Project Mayhem soldiers scaling down a
building to start a fire and paint a big face on its side. Although this latter scene was
not actually in the film earlier, Fincher uses it to show Jack clearly in a Tyler-like
state.
Fincher also flashes to Jack having sex with Marla, which prompts Tyler to
bring something up that will drive the film to its conclusion. Tyler thinks Marla is a
problem and says that "Marla knows too much and we have to think about how this
may compromise our plans." The conversation with his alterself makes Jack pass out.
In another intertextual voice-over we hear Jack explaining a change over, where a reel
change occurs in a movie and the movie goes on without the audience ever knowing.
Jack has made the change over mentally, but nobody sees a difference. To the outside
world, he is Tyler Durden.
Jack awakes and immediately rushes out of his hotel and heads back home. By
this time he is questioning his own sanity, asking "Am I sleeping, have I been Tyler
longer and longer?" A quick cut of a plane in flight, then Jack on the plane, and then
Jack is in the house. He finds the house empty, except for several bathtubs full of
explosives. A cut to Tyler in an earlier scene saying "with the right house hold
chemicals one can make almost anything." Cut back to Jack moving throughout the
house gathering the files that he had seen earlier. He begins calling the telephone
numbers that he finds in the files and eventually discovers they all belong to large
corporate offices in the city. Jack begins to understand. The buildings are all targets.
Jack calls one of the numbers and tries to warn the building's security about the
impending doom. But the voice on the other end tells Jack "everything is under
control sir, we're solid." Jack next goes to see Marla to explain to her that her life is
in danger. Although Marla is at first angry and hesitant she agrees to sit down and
listen to Jack.
Jack and Marla sit down in a local diner to talk. In a wonderful tongue-and­
cheek scene the waiter leans over Jack's shoulder and says "sir anything you order is
on the house." Annoyed, Marla wants to know why, then proceeds to order a large
amount of food, including clam chowder, to take advantage of the situation. Jack
stops the waiter and says "clean food please," to which the waiter replies "sir may I
advise against the lady eating the chowder."
Jack apologizes to Marla for the way he treated her and confesses that he really
likes her and he doesn't want anything to happen to her. He explains that her life is in
danger and she needs to get out of town. Infuriated, Marla walks out with Jack
chasing behind. He catches her and forces her to take money and get on a bus out of
town, warning to avoid major cities for a while. Marla takes the money as "asshole
tax" and says to Jack "Tyler, you're the worse thing that ever happened to me." And
she departs on the bus.
Jack next goes to the police and asks to be arrested, telling the police that he is
the leader of a terrorist organization. Jack sits in a room with several police officers
and tells them all about Fight Club and Project Mayhem. Jack is now fully accepting
of the fact that he is Tyler. He explains to the police that the organization, of which he
is the head, plans to blow up the corporate headquarters of several major credit card
companies. The police officer in charge gets up from the table and tells Jack to stay
there and he'll check some of this out. He leaves the room. After a brief moment of
stillness one of the cops still present in the room says "I really admire what you are
doing sir, you're a brave man." The police officers in the room proclaim their
admiration for Jack and they proceed to inform him that it is necessary to remove his
testicles. Jack is shocked, yelling "but you're the police." Against his screams of
protest that are soon muffled, the police pick him up, place him on the table, and place
a knife under his testicles. However, in a moment of confusion Jack manages to grab
a gun from a holster and backs his assailants away. Shaken, Jack waves the gun at the
police and, in another bit of parodistic dialogue reaching back to film noir, Jack yells
"the first person out this fucking door gets a lead salad."
As Jack runs out of the police station Fincher moves the plot a step closer
toward its conclusion. As Jack runs, Fincher puts the shot in slow motion and a voice­
over from Jack saying "I ran until my muscles hurt and my vains pumped battery
acid." Jack eventually reaches one of the buildings that is going to be blown up. As
Jack tries to break through the plexy glass front door, Tyler appears behind him.
Again Jack tries to break into the building, and Tyler appears inside the building now
taunting Jack with laughter. Jack pulls the gun out of his pocket and fires through the
door, thus gaining entry. Inside he finds a van full of explosives.
Jack enters the van and looks over a bomb and begins preparing to diffuse it.
Tyler tries to convince him otherwise by saying "This is the greatest thing you've ever
done." As Jack babbles to himself about discounting the bomb, Tyler informs him
there are ten other bombs in ten other buildings. Jack screams at Tyler "since when is
Project Mayhem about murder?" Again, Fincher reinforces the anti-malicious rhetoric
of the film. Tyler explains that the buildings are empty and the security and custodial
staff all belong to Project Mayhem. Tyler further states that "we're not killing anyone
we're setting them free." At this point Fincher is very explicit about avoiding the
representation of malicious brutality.
After some interesting banter with Tyler about what is in Jack's head and
Tyler's head, Jack manages to disconnect the bomb by focusing on what is in Tyler's
head, because what's in Tyler's head must be in Jack's head. Fincher shows that Jack
understands his split identity, which will become important at the end of the film.
However, disconnecting the bomb doesn't sit well with Tyler, who begins to pummel
Jack around the garage.
Tyler advances on Jack and Jack draws the gun that he still possesses, firing at
Tyler to no avail. Fincher finally removes any and all doubt that Tyler is a fiction of
Jack's mind. In another moment of intertextual parody, Tyler strikes a kung fu movie
pose, then attacks Jack. Jack tries to get away, but with some interesting editing, Tyler
appears everywhere Jack tries to go. Also, Fincher cuts to a view of a garage security
camera monitor and the viewer sees Jack fighting himself on the black and white
screen. Jack is thrown down a stair case and is knocked unconscious.
A fade out of the black that is Jack's unconsciousness and Jack hears Tyler's
voice telling him that there is just three minutes to go. The viewer is back to the
beginning of the film where Jack is tired to a chair, confirmed by a voice-over from
Jack saying "this is where we came in." And then Jack says to Tyler "I still can't
think of anything to say." Tyler's reply is a bold and explicit piece of intertextuality,
simply commenting "ah, flashback humor."
As Jack contemplates his situation he looks out the window and sees members
of Project Mayhem bringing Marla to Tyler. Jack pleads with Tyler, but Tyler
becomes angry, yelling "how far have you come because of me." Jack now begins
trying to reason his way out of the situation. He looks at the gun in Tyler's hand and
says "the guns in your hand, the gun's in my hand" and the gun appears in Jacks hand.
Tyler is apathetic and responds simply with "interesting." Jack then places the barrel
of the gun under his chin. Tyler, moderately annoyed asks "why would you want to
put a gun to your head." Jack replies "our head." Then he goes on to say "Tyler, I
want you to really listen to me, my eyes are open." Jack pulls the trigger blowing a
hole, presumably, through his cheek. Tyler staggers and has his last piece of
dialogue in the film as he asks "what's that smell?" Smoke snakes out of Tyler's head
and a cut to the back of his head shows a huge hole. Tyler falls to the floor, and cut to
a medium shot and Jack looks down to where Tyler fell. Tyler is gone.
The Project Mayhem members now enter the room where Jack is being held
and bring in Marla, who is venomous with anger. Stunned by Jack's appearance the
Project Mayhem soldiers comment on how bad he looks. Jack orders them to release
Marla and she comes screaming at him stopping abruptly when she sees his face. The
Project Mayhem crew leaves to find Jack some gauze. Marla insists on medical
attention, but Jack tells her not to worry, everything is going to be fine. As he says
this, through the windows, buildings across the street begin to explode. Jack takes
Marla's hand and tells her "trust me everything is going to be fine" as buildings begin
to crash in the background. Jack's last words in the film are to Marla when he says
"you met me at a very strange time in my life." In a closing medium range shot
Fincher has Jack and Marla looking at each other longingly then threw the window as
buildings collapse. They are holding hands and from the back look very much alike,
offering a final sense of adrogeny. The frame flickers and a quick cut of a man's penis
and then the credits.
It is worth noting that the end of the film is quite a bit different from the end of
Chuck Palahniuk's book. The end of the film can readily be interpreted as a
Hollywood ending, with Jack saving Marla from Tyler. And it is with her rescue that
Jack is himself saved. Although the final shot of the film is parody, with Jack and
Marla lovingly watching the neon sunset explosion of building, Fincher appears to
deviate toward a more resoundingly Hollywood resolution. Palahniuk's book has
Marla rescuing Jack, with the help of the testicular cancer support group. In the book,
Jack ends up in a psychiatric ward waiting to be released, being reinforced by the
people that bring him his meals with gestures like "Can't wait for your return Mr.
Durden."
CHAPTER3
ANALYSIS AND DECONSTRUCTION OF THE FILM FIGHT CLUB
Hutcheon (1988) argues that an analysis of a postmodern text must include a
consideration of parody and irony. According to Hutcheon, postmodern parody "uses
and abuses, installs and then subverts, the very concepts it seeks to challenge" (p. 3).
The use of postmodern parody in film critiques the assumptions of realism and
modernity by ironically displaying and exploiting those assumptions. Thus, "parody
is a perfect postmodern form ... for it paradoxically both incorporates and challenges
that which it parodies" (Hutcheon 1988, p. 11).
Fincher makes extensive use of parody in the film Fight Club to subvert
traditional visual styles, narrative styles, and cultural practices. Fight Club is an
exceptional example of a film that challenges artistic and cultural norms. Fight Club
succeeds as a subversive text because of the "layered" approach at subversion that
Fincher employs, seeking to subvert cinematically, with unconventional visual
techniques; narratively, with unconventional story-telling techniques; and culturally,
by combining visual and story-telling strategies to subvert and challenge normative
cultural practices. Such a multi-layered approach is recognized by McClure and
McClure (2001) when they discuss the tendency of postmodern cultural practices to
subvert "notions of author, narrator, subject position, plot, temporal sequencing,
representation, and subjectivity" (p. 82). Moreover, Fight Club makes extensive use
of intertexuality, a form of parody, that is often associated with postmodern texts
(Woods, 1999). Fincher weaves intertextual dialogue and visuals to craft a parodic
statement.
Cinematically, Fight Club is an intriguing and clearly subversive film. One
particular use of intertextuality is a caricature of Brad Pitt flashed at points during the
film. Fincher uses this highly unconventional visual effect to parody the usual
Hollywood special effects, and to parody the Hollywood star power effect, which in
this case is the star power of Brad Pitt. Rather than the usual explosions or
grotesquely morphing bodies, Fincher flashes a small Brad Pitt down in the comer of
the frame when Jack first speaks to his doctor about his insomnia. This caricature of
Pitt is the anti-special effect, reducing Pitt, the star attraction of the film, to a comical
intertextual copy of the real thing. It doesn't appear that Fincher is using the Pitt
caricature as a device in the plot for the purpose of showing the moment that Jack
creates Tyler and gives him form. The momentary visual is such a discrete act that it
is difficult to interpret it as a plot device. Rather it appears to be a playful juxtposting
that is usually found in postmodern texts (Woods, 1999).
Fincher also uses an intertextual technique in the scene where Jack is
discussing Tyler's job as a projectionist and that he splices pornography into family
films. Tyler reaches into the upper right comer of the frame and points to a "cigarette
bum," explaining that a "cigarette bum" is the cue to switch reels in the projectionist's
booth. Again, Fincher uses an unconventional technique, exposing the convention and
adding to the critical and parodic attitude of the film.
Fincher also makes frequent use of intertextual references to the cinematic with
dialogue. References to Ozzie and Harriet and Jack "thanking the Academy" are
obvious examples. One of the most interesting uses of this intertextual dialogue is the
film noir reference to a "lead salad" that Jack makes during the third stage of the film
while in the police department. With such a reference, Fincher weaves a historic pop­
cultural antecedent into a film that challenges a pop-cultural existence.
Perhaps the most subversive piece of intertextuality in Fight Club is Fincher' s
use of it in a self-reflexive manner, in other words, he turns the film in on itself. There
is one small but exceptional use of this technique in the film. As with many
postmodern storytellers, Fincher plays with plot sequencing and uses a temporal
disruption to add a type of desperation to the film. Fight Club begins and ends at the
same point, eventually bringing the narrative, as told by Jack, full circle. As Jack
awakens to find himself in the same position in which the film began, he makes a
reference to the beginning of the film stating that he "still can't think of anything to
say." Tyler's reply of "hmm, flash back humor." In two pieces of dialogue, Fincher
has his characters momentarily cognizant of the fact that they are part of the film. His
characters not only exist in the narrative, but are aware that they exist in the narrative.
This moment of "narrative awareness" by the characters, coupled with intertextual
references of past film genres, terms of art, and references to the Academy of Motion
Picture Arts & Sciences, expose the barriers between reality and fiction; between life
and art. The difference between the real world and the world of celluloid fiction is
undermined.
Fincher also relies on some traditional Hollywood special effects designed to
give the viewer a "rush" and help develop his story. The flashback scenes that Fincher
uses at the moment Jack discovers he is Tyler, is a good example of this fairly
common approach to special effects in the film. Although the liquid-like
cinematography is interesting, it in itself isn't particularly subversive. It only gains
some critical achievement when it is considered as part of the film's overall narrative.
This is the case when Jack and Tyler are fighting each other in the garage, shortly after
Jack realizes that he and Tyler are one person. This is certainly not a style of effect
that is new to Hollywood, nor is it a particularly subversive visually. However, these
visual effects, coupled with the overall plot's pace and themes of the film, come
together as a subversive narrative.
The first-person narrative used in Fight Club, a characteristic of postmodern
narratives, lends a provincial, highly subjective viewpoint to the film. Gone is the
great, all knowing narrator with an objective eye that is aware of all the mistakes and
flaws of the characters. Rather, the viewer relies on Jack to lead the way through the
narrative. The viewer becomes aware of Jack's difficulties only when Jack does. The
viewer learns of Tyler and Marla's first sexual encounter only as Jack learns of it. The
viewer learns of Bob's death only when Jack learns of it. There is nothing that the
viewer knows -revealed in the narrative-that Jack doesn't know. Using such a
point-of-view in the narrative is subversive in two important ways: first, it subverts
past mainstream story-telling techniques, challenging hegemonic Hollywood narrative
practices; second, it subverts the notion of modem objectivity and a place outside the
world in which the world maybe viewed and critiqued. Rather it brings the viewer
into the film, experiencing it in the same capacity as Jack-subjectively. For Fincher,
the first person narrative allows him to use an ingenious plot twist and have a more
dramatic effect as the viewer discovers Jack's dual identity at the same instant as Jack.
Another postmodern characteristic of Fight Club is the retelling, or
reinterpretation of history. Although the film Fight Club itself is not an explicit
retelling of, or challenge to, a particular historical moment or event, there are pieces
of dialogue that are clearly historiographic. Certainly Tyler's belief that this
generation of men "didn't live through a depression or have a great war to fight," is
part of what he sees as the overall problem. He sees those catastrophic events as
bringing purpose to life and establishing a generation's attitude toward men. Tyler
also takes a subversive shot at cultural history discussing how men are told that they
are going to be rock stars or wealthy businessmen, and that is simply not the case.
Tyler challenges America's oldest grand-narrative, that individual determination will
lead to fame and fortune. Historiographic references of past and present offer no real
historical interpretation, rather it offers what Patrick Phillips (Nelmes, 1996) identifies
as characteristically postmodern, "a nostalgic substitute for any real exploration of
either the past or present." Such a nostalgic substitute is exactly what is presented in
Fight Club.
The intertextual dialogue, visual effects, temporal disruption, first-person
narrative, and historiographic challenges are all characteristics of a postmodern text
and are used by Fincher to build a subversive film. These subversive techniques
challenge normative story-telling conventions, but it is the power of the subver_sive
narrative that challenges cultural tenets and cultural hegemony. And the key cultural
tenets challenged in Fight Club are rampant capitalism and materialistic narcissism.
Fight Club depicts these cultural tenets as hegemonic grand-narratives gone wildly
awry. The film challenges these themes in two very distinct ways: first, though Tyler
and his postulations and chosen life style; second through the instillation of the very
ideas it seeks to displace.
Fincher clearly challenges the ideology of rampant capitalism through the use
of Tyler and his speeches. From the first moment that Tyler Durden is introduced, he
preaches his anti-materialistic philosophy in a straight-forward and unforgiving
manner. Tyler's rhetoric explicitly attacks everything corporate, narcissistic and
material. He demystifies for the viewer the illusions of safety on an aircraft, the
ridiculous names given to mere blankets, the idea of self-improvement, and self­
importance.
Tyler's life, as well as Jack's after he meets Tyler, also explicitly attacks the
idea of the typical consumer life. Tyler not only lacks the much valued corporate
work ethic, he sabotages it. Jack refers to Tyler as a food service guerilla-terrorist,
whose goal is to eventually sue the very company that employs him. His primary
source of income is making soap out of fat that he steals from a lippo-suction clinic,
ironically recycling and returning that which has been discarded for purposes of
vanity. Tyler chooses to live in a place without television, rejecting what is perhaps
the very signifier of a consumer society. Tyler's whole existence, at least in the first
half of the film, is a complete rejection of contemporary life.
On a more subtle level, Fight Club challenges hegemonic processes by
installing then subverting, and as such demystifying those processes. As the film
transitions from its first to its second part, Tyler and Fight Club mutate into the very
thing that they seek to challenge, finally becoming Project Mayhem. As Fight Club
expands it eventually turns into, as pointed out by Jack, Tyler's own franchise, with
Tyler as the CEO. He gives orders and people listen, he advocates an aggressive,
take-no-prisoners attitude mirroring the corporate raiding era of the 1980's (Giroux,
2001). Project Mayhem is another corporate entity, another corporate identity which
brings Jack full circle. Instead of the usual white button down oxford, the uniform for
Project Mayhem is all black. The parallels with an Orwellian nightmare seem clear.
Whether Project Mayhem or Corporation X, all members dress alike, talk alike and
follow instructions in hopes of progressing beyond that point which they currently find
themselves. Clearly Fincher makes a powerful point that power leads to hierarchy,
and eventually everything social succumbs to that hierarchical order. It is perhaps
here that the ironic status of postmodernism is most clear. Perhaps entering into
criticism of modernity leads to the inevitable instillation of order and hierarchy.
Beyond the subversive challenges to corporate/materialistic cultural tenants, a
central theme ofFincher's Fight Club is the question of identity, particularly
masculine identity. In the postmodern era, identity is not rooted or fixed in the
individual. Rather it is a shifting social process, constantly being renegotiated and
reinvented. Identity becomes a process by which the individual socially constructs
himself.
Jack struggles throughout the film looking to discover who he is. He seeks his
masculine self -his noble purpose. Jack's goal is allusive. He is confronted with a
cultural geography that falls between the masculine and feminine. As a result, he
slides more and more into his self-created dementia. Fincher weaves his narrative
around this core concept of masculine identity, challenging the modernist tenants that
have illuminated this concept of identity as given, with an ever evolving process that
asks what does it mean to be male in a postmodern society.
Fincher takes the implicit theme of identity and collides it with the explicit
anti-corporate theme, and shows the consumer age emasculation of men. No longer
do men seem to have jobs that offer them some fulfillment and identity (Giroux,
2001). Rather, the information age has lead to the feminization of men. There are
numerous references to, and symbolic acts of, castration throughout the film. Bob is
certainly a symbol of today's emasculated male, equipped with breasts and lacking
testicles. Fincher seems to be saying that like a cancer, the new corporate culture has
taken away that which makes men, men. Despite the fact that Jack isn't suffering
from testicular cancer he begins to find relief at the group meeting because he too, at a
spiritual level, has been castrated.
Again, the film turns on itself and installs that which it seeks to subvert. As
the film progresses and Project Mayhem develops, first Tyler and his crew attack the
police chief and threaten to castrate him, then one of the Project Mayhem members
cuts the elastic, in a very explicit form of symbolic castration, that has been wrapped
around the police chiefs testicles. Finally, of course, Project Mayhem members try to
castrate Jack at Tyler's orders. Tyler creates Fight Club in an attempt to reclaim that
which is masculine, but in the end it leads to yet another version of emasculation.
A very interesting and antithetical theme that runs through Fight Club, a film
that strives to make the point that men are losing their masculinity, is homoeroticism.
There is a strong underlining homoeroticism in the relationship that exists between
Tyler and Jack. The Ozzie and Harriet reference, the hint at a menage-a-trios, and
Tyler's kiss on Jack's hand followed by a playful, albeit confused giggle, are all
ambiguously displayed for the viewer. With this homoerotic subtext, Fincher again
pulls the viewer in paradoxical directions. Although making a case for a return to
masculinity, he builds male to male relationships, which in many cases have an
underlying femininity. Perhaps, Fincher is trying to make a reference to a two­
thousand-year-old Socratic ideal of male to male relationships. More likely, however,
Fincher seeks to subvert the idea of the typical romantic relationship while parodying
buddy films of the past.
Certainly Fincher's portrayal of Jack and Tyler is a parody of past buddy genre
relationships in the likes of Newman and Redford, Lancaster and Douglas, Martin and
Lewis, and Glover and Gibson. Once Marla is added to make a trio, Jack and Tyler
very much take on the Newman-Redfordeques persona, and Fight Club looks
somewhat like Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid. Of course the irony here is that
in order to create this infamous pairing of past genres, Fincher splits Jack in two in a
burlesque of the genre. Fincher's parody of the popular and profitable buddy film of
the past again illustrates his desire to subvert that which is conventional Hollywood.
Jack also is parodostic of other film characters and images. Certainly Edward
Norton has the worrisome stare of Dustin Hoffman in the 1960's lost soul film The
Graduate (an early subversive masterpiece in its own right). Jack's devotion to Marla
is reminiscent of young Ben's love for Elaine. Much in the same way that Ben comes
and rescues Elaine, Jack comes and rescues Marla. Both couples face an uncertain
future but face that future hand in hand. On a darker level, Jack bears a strong
resemblance to Travis Bickle, the psychotic cabbie in Martin Scorsese's Taxi Driver.
Both Jack and Travis are haunted by insomnia, and like Tyler, Travis works the night
shift, living in a world lit only by neon. The character of Travis Bickle, is also, to a
large degree, emasculated. His search for meaning, his difficulties with women, and
even his apathetic view toward pornography, point to emasculation and a male identity
problem. Travis Bickle's answer to male emasculation is the assassination of a
politician and the saving of a young prostitute.
Tyler's answer to male emasculation is Fight Club. Fight Club is the step from
mere philosophy to action. What does the punishment of Fight Club offer its
participants? In the film the pure physicality has a cathartic effect allowing an escape
from the doldrums of the empty life that these men seem to lead. Fincher installs a
grotesque and temporary escapism. At one point in the film, Jack discusses with the
viewer how in the real world a copy boy can be a god for a few minutes when he
trounces the maitre d' of some restaurant, and how a person isn't the same as he is
during Fight Club as in the outside world, he's a different person altogether. Men
come to Fight Club to be unshackled and to be part of a premodern wolfpack, with its
attendant ritual catharsis.
Of course one of the main criticisms of the film is its stark violence and how it
seemingly promotes hypermasculinity. Such criticism seems short sighted, since the
premodern alternative of brutish physicality is ultimately subverted as well. Also,
The fights during Fight Club are resoundingly non-violent, with the one exception of
Jack beating the blond Project Mayhem crewmember toward the third part of the film.
Otherwise, the fights are physical but not violent. The fights lack malice, and rather,
remain highly physical contests between men. Fight Club then, is about the catharsis
of physicality and not violence. Certainly there is a male appeal to such a contest that
is probably appalling to woman. The cathartic appeal of basic physical confrontation
in ritualistic scapegoating and mortification clearly is installed. Such physical tests
that are purely mano e mano may take on a cathartic appeal, but are ultimately
subverted in Fight Club.
The physicality of Fight Club tends to put things into a different perspective
for Jack and friends. He mentions how the volume on everything else gets turned
down, and how it appears to make everything seem less than it used to be. The fights
are antithetical to everything else in Jack's life. Jack's life is about self-improvement.
He is constantly trying to buy the perfect furniture and build a respectable wardrobe.
But to Tyler self-improvement is nonsense. It's like "polishing the brass on the
Titanic."
To Tyler self-improvement is masturbation; self-destruction is the only real
path toward self-discovery. Again, Fight Club installs and subverts. Although Tyler
preaches self-destruction, it is self-destruction for the reason of self-improvement. To
Tyler "only after you have lost everything, can you be anything." The ultimate goal is
to become more than you are, which is a conflicting message with the notion that "you
are not special" that is shouted at the Project Mayhem members. But a man is special,
he's a god, but only during Fight Club.
To a large degree it appears that Fincher does not want Fight Club to be about
gratuitous violence. And for the most part he succeeds. With the exception of the
severe beating that Jack gives the blond young man, and the shooting of Bob, Fincher
goes out of the way to make his point without gratuitous violence. Tyler points out
that all the buildings that are to be destroyed are empty, controlled by Project
Mayhem. And even the Asian convenience store clerk is never in any real danger.
Tyler is not a murderer, although the viewer is lead to believe he may have taken that
step with Marla. But he doesn't. He isn't allowed too. It is the thought of injury to
Marla that brings Jack and Tyler back together into one person. So, it may also be
postulated that Marla was not in any real danger either. The empty violence of Fight
Club is a subversion of the usual Hollywood violence, that usually takes the form of
gory, "shoot'm-up" blood lust celebrations. Fincher seems to carry anti-Hollywood
subversions throughout the entire film with one glaring exception -the ending of the
film.
The ending of Fight Club seems to be in contrast to the theme and plot
sequencing that drove Chuck Palahniuk's book. The ending of the book seems to
correlate more with the rest of the narrative as depicted in the film, but for some
reason the ending was changed quite substantially. Palahniuk's book ends with Marla
coming to rescue Jack with the cancer support group in tow, not Jack coming to rescue
Marla. Moreover, the end of the book finds Jack in a asylum awaiting his eventual
release, spurred by the praise and anticipation of the food service workers that slide his
meals under the door while uttering "can't wait for your return Mr. Durden"
(Palahniuk 1996). The film has Jack coming to the rescue of Marla, ensuring that as
their relationship moves forward, things will be much improved. While Fincher
maintains some very interesting cinematic features, including the final adrogenous
shot of Marla and Jack, that seemingly installs a romantic, Hollywood ending. He
wraps everything up in a tight little package, as the viewer witnesses the
disappearance of Jack's alter ego into, a synthesis with a new Jack emerging and ready
to create his own identity. The viewer gets the feeling that Jack's sudden "awakening"
with his "eyes open" marks the end of Project Mayhem. Chuck Palahniuk's book
leaves exactly the opposite feeling.
Such a comparison is meaningless to anyone who has not digested both the
book and the film. However, such a choice may indicate that Fight Club's ending was
mainstreamed to please a wider viewing audience and soften a harsh critical response.
With the dissolution of Tyler from the screen and a rejection of what he had done
because he wasn't "himself," Jack compromises much of the powerful anti-material,
anti-corporate culture rhetoric of the film, representing it as the ranting of a delusional
schizophrenic. There is no getting around the fact that Jack was a delusional
schizophrenic. But Pincher's ending rejects both the masculinity of modern corporate
culture and premodern brutality which are the root cause of Jack's psychosis. The
viewer is invited to feel sympathetic to those hegemonic processes that Tyler rallied
against, in a cult of victimage that also includes femininity and is horrified by its
premodern alternative. So, in the end Jack comes to his senses and to the rescues
himself and Marla.
There is another possibility however. One that if intentional, is easily lost on
the viewer, and one that is much more subversive. Jack doesn't rescue Marla in a
romantic Hollywood ending. Rather, Marla's presence does, in fact, rescue Jack. And
it is Jack's ultimate embracing of Marla that is the film's ultimate subversion. Marla
is the catalyst for Jack's eventual integration with Tyler, remaining the synthesis at the
end of the film.
The character of Marla is one of the most dynamic in the film and represents
one of the elements with the most potential for discussion and disagreement. It is not
hard to imagine that one key area that opens Fight Club to rash criticism, from a
feminist view, is its portrayal of Marla Singer. Arguably, Fight Club installs anti­
feminist ideologies. Marla is portrayed as a sexual toy for the use of Tyler. Tyler
calls her a "sport fuck," indicating that there is no love or emotional commitment to
her whatsoever. Any emotional support comes from man to man contact in the film.
Her character may be read as a drug-dependent, lewd, sexually promiscuous girl
looking to be saved and taken care ofby a man. Marla functions as a victim to male
sexual gratification. But even this classification is fleeting, as the film subverts this by
installing homoeroticism. Any such a one-sided reading is very much limited as it
must neglect or ignore the critical subversions.
Marla could as well be interpreted as a strong woman, a survivor who finds a
way to get by with or without Jack, a liberated woman as it were. Marla isn't anymore
needy than any character in the film, even less so. Marla is not the reason Jack is the
way he is. Rather, Marla is a victim of the same culture that has emasculated Jack.
She states herself that she was a "lovely girl at one time and that nobody knows what
happened to her." Marla is an intelligent, strong woman, sexually emancipated, but as
unhappy and troubled as all the other characters in the film. Ultimately, Fight Club
does not blame Marla for the emasculation of Jack, or women for the plight that men
face in the new information age. The film places the blame squarely on the
hypermaterialistic, corporate culture. As such, an alternative and more postmodern
reading of the film has Jack embracing the feminine by choosing Marla over Tyler.
And it is this embrace of the feminine that makes the ending of the film a recognition
of the postmodern. The feminine (not necessarily the feminist) represents a tum
toward a postmodern frame of mind, in contrast to the masculine of the modem and
premodem. Fight Club may be about male emasculation, but it doesn't necessarily
install a return to patriarchy. Postmodern texts don't offer those kinds of definitive
answers (Hutcheon, 1988). Jack's embracing of the feminine is very much a
subversive act when considered in the light of the masculine physicality of the film.
Again however, Fight Club, as a postmodern text, installs and subverts the processes it
challenges, exhibiting a fractured, ambiguous contradictory vision of masculinity and
femininity.
The central issue of identity in Fight Club mirrors the fractured character of
postmodemism. The ultimate substructure of the plot of Fight Club is driven by
Jack's struggle with his own identity. The choice of Edward Norton to play Jack is
interesting since he incidentally played a character with a split personality in his
breakout role in Primal Fear. The severity of Jack's identity problems eventually
leads to the creation of Tyler. Tyler is an alternative. It isn't just that Tyler is
everything that Jack wants to be, Tyler is the opposite of what Jack is. He is not an
Armani wearing corporate worker bee. Jack has split himself, and Marla navigates
through the paradox of masculine identity issues. Despite actually being the same
person, a friction exists between Tyler and Jack. Tyler is the hypermasculine and Jack
is more feminine. Throughout the film, Fincher has Jack questioning Tyler's actions,
which are in fact his own actions. The convenience store clerk, the scene with the
police commissioner, and ultimately Marla, show Jack frequently questioning the
actions of Tyler, adding to his schizophrenia. When it gets too much for Jack, he
spends more and more time as Tyler.
Tyler questions the notion of the culture corporate and materialistic identity.
Tyler shouts to his followers at Fight Club and in Project Mayhem "you are not your
job, you are not the contents of your wallet, you are not the car you drive." Later
Fincher has the same dialogue spoken by Jack, when Jack flashes back to the first
Project Mayhem's attack, when he is in the place of Tyler. Fincher uses a reiteration
of this dialogue for its resolutely poignant attitude toward defining oneself through
objects. Tyler is clear that everybody has an identity crisis in this postmodern,
corporate culture. Tyler tells Jack that people think of changing themselves everyday,
Jack was just brave enough to follow through with it. Tyler's overall feeling is that
men have an identity problem. Ultimately, they have been stripped of their identity,
which has been replaced with corporate logos. Moreover, men no longer have a
means of creating identity. According to Tyler, there is no great war or great recession
to struggle through. There are no defining moments, only superficial promises ofrock
or movie stardom. Ultimately Tyler rejects the whole notion of masculine identity,
telling his followers that "you are not special, you are not unique." To Tyler there is
no identity, everyone is the same organic matter, and everyone eventually ends up
dead. Jack states that "on a long enough time line, everyone's chance of survival is
zero." In the end, identity means little.
Fincher exasperates the identity issue by mixing in questions of gender with
adrogenous visuals. Bob with the high voice and "bitch tits," the adrogenous shot at
the end with Jack and Marla, and the homoeroticism all question an identity based on
gender and sexuality.
Within Fight Club there also exists the paradox of cultural geography. Giroux
(2001) astutely recognizes that Fight Club identifies a new enemy to democracy. No
longer is the large and ever looming state the potential Leviathan, of which Thomas
Hobbs warned. Rather the new gargantuan is the multi-national corporation. Giroux
criticizes Fight Club for not addressing the issues that he feels are central to the
problems facing today's society. It is questionable whether or not Fincher is
necessarily addressing any one central issue. Moreover, it is unfair to simply attack a
text because it doesn't address certain issues, particularly when they may not be
central to the narrative as envisioned by the artist. A text should be analyzed for what
it does or does not do, not for what it should have done. However, one criticism that
Giroux has of Fight Club that is worth exploration is the representation of public and
private spaces and lives.
The corporate culture that has pervaded western society over much of the
twentieth century has driven people out of the public realm and into a more restricted
space that has been referred to as "private enclaves" (Bellah, Madsen, Sullivan,
Swidler, & Tipton, 1985). With the growth of corporate culture, and the post World
War Two suburban explosion, people have stopped coming together to discuss public
issues and have retreated to a more private materialistic life (Kunstler, 1993). The
tum toward private life is accompanied by a degree of narcissistic behavior and a
move toward a seemingly empty hyperindividualism.
This theme is evident in Fight Club, installed in Jack who has cocooned
himself in an empty yuppie fortress. He describes his apartment as an enormous
concrete vault of a structure with foot think walls and sealed glass, Jack's
condominium is the perfect hide away. Moreover, Jack has filled his private place
with item after item of catalog lifestyle choices. Jack lives the private materialist life
of a worker bee. The notion of a private life is symbolized by Jack's description of
living in a "single serving" world as he jets around from one place to another having
superficial discussions with "single serving friends" spending his nights in lonely
hotel rooms with little public contact. Even the hotel employees only appear on
television as part of a hotel commercial. When Fincher shows Jack having coffee at
an outside cafe, everyone keeps to themselves. Marla is another lost and private soul.
She lives in a small room at a hotel with little outside contact. In both the hotel and
Jack's condominium, people blot out others by simply turning up the television.
Pincher's characters live privatized lives.
However, it is a return to public spaces that frees the characters or at least
helps them deal with their trite existence. Both Marla and Jack go to support group
meetings in order to find solace and rest. It is in this public sphere that Jack and Marla
open up and seek to address their problems. Ironically, they are both in this public
sphere living a lie, pretending to be someone else and in Jack's case using a different
name. They are living in the shadow of a true public sphere because they are afraid to
enter as themselves, subverting a clear public identity. Still in need of more than what
support groups can offer, Jack, with Tyler, creates Fight Club, that lays ambiguously
on the slope between the public and the private.
Fight Club is a microcosm for an alternative public sphere. These men come
together to have contact, identity, and an outlet for their frustrations. There is no
social or material domination at Fight Club, it is all raw physicality. Everyone is
socially equal and anyone can fight with anyone. Tyler and Jack both participate and
Jack is depicted losing as often as winning his fights. Moreover, everyone has to
fight, there are no voyeurs in Fight Club. All are participants.
However, there is a question as to the exclusionary nature of Fight Club.
Although men of all colors are represented, women are not, or so it appears. This
creates the potential for a feminist attack on the film. Although everyone in Fight
Club has an equal right to a fight and can challenge anyone to a fight, including Tyler
or Jack, not everyone has an equal say in the rules of Fight Club. That privilege is
reserved for Jack and Tyler. Again, Fincher offers no clear statement of ideology or
answers to potential questions. Rather, he installs and subverts, so that nothing is
necessarily privileged.
Fincher has layered Fight Club with visual and narrative subversion that points
a critical finger at several cultural practices and institutions. He explores issues of
male emasculation, identity, corporate domination, and public vs. private cultural
space. He uses cinematic techniques and intertextuality, and narrative parody that
both installs and subverts traditional Hollywood styles. His plot structure allows the
viewer to experience a Hitchcock like plot twist allowing for a different reading of the
film upon the second viewing. Truly, Fincher has created a very interesting film.
However, the question remains, does this film reach the rhetorical goal of critical
subversion and what exactly is installed?
CHAPTER4
CONCLUSION
The central question of this thesis remains, does Fight Club as a postmodern
text reach the rhetorical goal of critical subversion or does it reinforce the same
hegemonic processes that it seeks to subvert? Although this analysis has been
confined to the film Fight Club, the question posed is central to postmodern texts in
general, and particularly to films that are part of a newly emerging sub-genre of
postmodern film that deal with male identity. As stressed earlier in this thesis, the
academy award-winning film American Beauty, which is very close to Fight Club
thematically, is also part of this sub-genre. The question of critical subversion is of
particular importance to this sub-genre of postmodern film because films of this sub­
genre are especially susceptible to several kinds of critical attack. As a fractured
culture continues to fuel issues of identity and as more and more films are identified as
postmodern, the potential social impact of such films will be vital to critical discourse.
The first step in answering the question posed by this thesis is to underscore
Fight Club as an exemplary postmodern text, which this thesis has done. Fight Club
uses the personal first person narrative that is associated with postmodern texts
(McClure & McClure, 2001; Woods, 1999). Fight Club uses intertextuality as a
subversive technique to drive the narrative both visually and rhetorically.
Intertextuality has been identified as a component of postmodern texts (Best &
Kellner, 1997; Waugh, 1993; McClure & McClure, 2001; Woods, 1999). It is clearly
evident that Fight Club subverts traditional narrative style.
Thematically, Fight Club attacks consumer culture, corporate control, and
materialistic identity. These are the themes that are most often identified and attacked
by postmodern theorists and philosophers (Best & Kellner, 1997; Woods, 1999;
Jameson, 1991).
Fight Club is rooted in the search for identity, a theme common amongst films
of the genre and certainly central to this film. Virtually all characters are conflicted
about who they are. Jack particularly struggles with the identity question throughout
the film. What does it mean to be male in the postmodern epoch? Tyler questions
how the postmodern male should define himself, after all "there is no great war to
fight." And so the question becomes what is identity? Jack's identity is a social
construction. He plays a role depending on the demands of the situation. Sometimes
he is a white-collar corporate soldier, other times he is the leader of a subversive group
of disenfranchised men. Jack sums up the notion of a socially-constructed identity
process when he states "a man isn't the same during Fight Club as he is outside of
Fight Club." In Fight Club's vision, a true self may simply not exist. Identity is a
cultural "product" that is processed and packaged. In the postmodern era, the
processes are corporate and materialistic. Fincher seems to be saying we are doomed
to be a product produced by a superficial lifestyle. That we're forever a cluster of
different identities, never really finding a center, rather existing in a split and :fractured
self and in a split and fractured culture.
However, Fincher does offer room for resistance against such an inevitable
existence. This resistance need not be just getting together to beat each other
senseless, but also may be found by recognizing the opposites of our perceived
identity, as Jack does first with Tyler, then when he embraces Marla and the feminine.
Fincher shows that consumer culture has an enormous impact on the characters
on his film. Even the character of Marla Singer, a character whose complexities offer
abundant fuel for discussion, is disenfranchised because of consumer culture. She
relies on stealing from Meals on Wheels in order to survive, and she goes to support
groups because the coffee and human contact are free. Marla, as well as Jack, Tyler,
Bob, and the rest of the film's characters are all living alienated lives.
Finally, Fight Club makes extensive use of parody and installs and subverts the
hierarchies and hegemonic assumptions of today's postmodern culture. The
instillation and parody of those processes is the main rhetorical technique employed in
the film. By installing and subverting these hegemonic processes and hierarchies in a
paradonic form, Fincher demystifies the very processes that exist in today's consumer
culture. This axial feature of postmodern texts goes beyond mere thematic qualities,
and gets at the heart of postmodernism as a critical theory. Postmodern texts
parodically install and subvert, or more specifically, install to subvert. The absence of
one or the other would serve to create and reinforce modem hegemonic assumptions,
and bring to question any true critical value of postmodemism. It is the exposure of
the hegemonic pretenses of modernity that makes postmodemism a subversive critical
theory and a critical artistic practice, and not a repackaged modem facsimile.
The need to identify Fight Club as a postmodern text as the first step in this
analysis raises another interesting question, which is sub-thematic to this thesis but is
worthy of a brief exploration. The question being if a postmodern text doesn't reach
its rhetorical goals, or if the text looks postmodern but misses the mark of a critical
goal, is it still a postmodern film? If Fight Club doesn't reach its goal of critical
subversion, is it still postmodern? Or does it become a modem solipsism? Fight Club
contains all the elements of a postmodern text, yet the question remains, does it
achieve the goal of critical subversion? There is also the issue ofreading the ending
of the film as a traditional romantic ending in the classic Hollywood style. Do all
elements in Fight Club need to be identified as postmodern, absent the potential for a
modem reading of the film, and does the film need to reach a critical subversive goal
in-order to be a true postmodern film? The answer is no. Identifying a text as
postmodern because of its narrative features, and in the case of film, its cinematic
features, is a priori to a consideration of whether or not the text reaches critical goals.
It is only through a critical theoretical approach that a text is identified as belonging to
a particular genre, then analyzed for critical effectiveness.
Moreover, a postmodern critical approach illustrates the discursive
interdependence of postmodernism and modernism when expressed in critical theory.
Postmodernism cannot dismiss the modem development of critical theory. Critical
theory is a product of modernism and predates the postmodern. However,
postmodernism makes a powerful contribution to critical theory as it provides a less
than partisan exposure of embedded ideologies. Hutcheon (1988) argues that
"parody's contradictory ideological implications ... make it an apt mode of criticism
for postmodemism, itself paradoxical it its conservative installing and then radical
contesting of conventions" (p. 129). While not claiming to be an emancipator as other
critical theories do, postmodern critical and aesthetic practices do reveal substructural
hegemonic practices.
I have, in this thesis, attempted to layout the elements of postmodern texts, and
show that Fight Club does indeed fall into this category of postmodern. But does
Fight Club critically subvert cultural practices? The answer is yes. Fight Club does
achieve a critical goal of subversion. Fight Club exposes ideologies by thematically
installing and subverting via antithetical juxapostings of identity, narrative, and
cinematography; leaving the viewer to contemplate ambiguous paradoxes. However,
critical subversion in Fight Club comes with a few caveats.
By the end of the film, the viewer has a distinct impression of Tyler's view of
corporate culture and the anti-materialistic attitude that accompanies it. The sharp
dialogue delivered articulately by Tyler invades the viewer. Tyler is direct in both
speech and action, and the viewer doesn't easily forget what Tyler Durden is saying
and advocating. Pincher's use of this direct dialogue and action impacts the viewer
and offsets any difficulty the viewer may have in understanding the subtlety of the
postmodern rhetorical practice of installing to subvert. However, the implicit
subversion that this technique carries can easily lead to alternative readings, even by a
media savvy audience. The viewer must navigate the paradox of the text, perhaps
interpreting a parodic element as something more, such as an authentic representation.
An alternative reading has the potential to undermine any critical subversive goals of
the film. The film Fight Club is particularly vulnerable to either a feminist reading or
a Marxist reading.
As mentioned earlier in this thesis as well as immediately above, Fight Club is,
in part, vulnerable to a feminist critique, and such an interpretation would in fact
undermine the subversive rhetoric and postmodern aesthetic practices of the film. The
physicality of Fight Club could easily be interpreted as hypermasculinity and male
violence, and Marla could be viewed as a mere object of sexual gratification. Such a
feminist reading of the film would greatly undercut any subversive message, and do
the film a great disservice.
Marla remains an incredibly memorable character of the film. She survives
trial after trial, ultimately becoming the catalyst for Jack's recovery. Marla's abundant
eroticism is not by any means degrading, rather it is an expression of sexual awareness
and equality. Such equality is brought into focus in the last shot of the film, which has
Jack and Marla staring out the window making it difficult to tell them apart. Marla is
representative of a women of the postmodern age. She is strong, intelligent and
sexually aggressive, while troubled by the same social forces as her male counterparts.
Reading Marla as being oppressed by male dominance is a distressingly one-side
view. Fight Club's hypermasculinity that may offend feminists is installed so it may
be subverted parodically, by the antithetical element ofhomoeroticism that is
prevalent in the film. Moreover, the installation of the premodem wolfpack-like
behavior that is first illustrated in the catharsis of Fight Club, is eventually subverted
as it morphs into a fanatical and hierarchical Project Mayhem.
Fight Club also lends itself to a potential Marxist reading, which again
subverts the rhetorical goals of the film. There is uniquely strong anti-capitalist, anti­
corporate language in the film. The plot of the film umavels around ever more
destructive attacks on large corporations, culminating in an attack on banking and
credit institutions, the very foundation of American capitalism. However, Fight Club
lacks any clear indication of class distinction or the have/have not opposition. The
film goes beyond who has more possessions and the reasons for wanting possessions.
Economic fairness in not necessarily a question asked in the film, but such a question
seems quite necessary for a Marxist text. Fight Club's relentless attack on rampant
corporatism is not necessarily Marxist and political economy itself may have a
"postmodern" side that is more critical than a perceived Marxist theoretical
foundation. To a postmodern theorist, Marxism remains another grand narrative.
Reducing Fight Club to a purely Marxist film is, again, short sighted.
The fact of the matter is that Fight Club and postmodernism go beyond
economic inequality to discourse inequality. Postmodernism is less about economic
superstructure than narrative superstructure. Economic inequality, and all social
inequalities, are maintained by narratives of hegemony. It is the grand narratives, and
language epistemologies that create and hide undesirable social conditions. It is these
social conditions and the discourse structures that support them, that are the focus of
postmodernism. By turning the postmodern into an "ism," these discourse structures
and the hegemonic processes are challenged and demystified. So, what then is the job
of the postmodern author and the postmodern critic? The postmodern author uses
particular techniques to construct a narrative that is politically challenging (Best &
Kellner, 1997). It is the job of the postmodern critic to use particular techniques to
uncover the layers of a text's discourse structure.
The postmodern author intentionally attempts to subvert, while shining a light
on the oppressive features of society that are taken for granted and believed to be an
unchangeable given. The postmodern author challenges the previously unquestioned
grand narratives that guide, in particular, western culture. The postmodern author uses
specific "cutting edge" narrative and rhetorical techniques that are necessary to
capture the attention of a media-savvy audience. Occasionally, an author's work lends
itself to an alternate reading upon a second viewing, because of details released at a
point in the narrative that redefines the story. The rise of the postmodern parallels the
rise of media sophistication. Postmodern texts challenge the media-savvy audience of
this epoch with rhetorical demystification.
Ultimately the question becomes what critical goal is achieved by Fight Club?
The answer is that Fight Club subverts modem hegemonic pretenses, particularly
those that have morphed into today's fragmented, privatized, corporate cultural
practices. This is also true of postmodern critical theory in general. Although always
carrying with it an element of modernity, it seeks to challenge and subvert modem
pretenses. Postmodemism is both a product of and a challenge to modernity.
As a critical theory and analytical method, Postmodemism is perhaps the most
important political and cultural critical practices to emerge in decades. Although, self­
admittedly subjective, Postmodemism carries a sense of deconstructive equality. That
is to say that Postmodemism readily challenges all potential power structures, making
a formidable enemy to hegemony. However, one of the potential difficulties
Postmodemism faces in the future, and one that is often advanced by critics, is the
enormous scope of Postmodemism, and the fact that "postmodemism defies definition
(Colbey, 183). Hans Bertens (2001) comments that "although obviously related to
deconstruction, Postmodern criticism casts its net a good deal wider" (p142). The
wide area being covered by Postmodemism often raises objections by more traditional
critics that favor a more structured approach to criticism. However, expanding the
understanding of both its potential as a critical theory and of the way in which it
operates as a cultural and critical practice will help Postmodernism remain an
important element ofrhetorical theory, perhaps paving the way for the next critical
theory that questions the epistemological foundation of logos.
Fight Club stand as an exceptional postmodern text at the forefront of an
emerging sub-genre of postmodern film. Its complexities are an example of the
rhetorical and aesthetic structures of postmodern texts. As audiences demand more
and more from film, postmodern texts and their complexities will change, strain, and
continue to challenge traditional notions of culture and aesthetics, while making
powerful social and political commentary. If postmodern film is creating a subversive
canon of its own, Fight Club is part of it.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bellah, R. N., Madsen, R., Sullivan, W.M., Swidler, A., Tipton, S., (1985). Habits of
the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life. Berkeley, Los
Angeles, London: The University of California Press.
Bertens, H., (2001). Literary Theory: The Basics. London & New York: Routledge.
Best, S., & Kellner, D. (1997). The Postmodern Turn. New York & London: The
Guilford Press.
Burke, K. (1969). A Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley, Los Angeles & London:
University of California Press.
Cobley, P., (2001). Narrative. London & New York: Routledge.
DeLapp, B. (1999, October 22). Sealed with a Fist: Fight Club Provides Righteous
Rumble in the Year's Most Maligned Movie Satire. Syracuse New Times, p.
Derrida, Jacques. (1967). Of Grammatology. Trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976.
Foss, S. K., (1996). Rhetorical Criticism: Exploration & Practice. Prospect Heights,
Illinois: Waveland Press, Inc.
Gottesman, R. (1990). Film Parody: An Immodest Proposal. Quarterly Review of
Film and Video. Vol. 12, 1-3.
Hewitt, C. (1999, October 14). A Disturbing, Boldly Great Film (that a Lot of People
Will Hate). Saint Paul Pioneer Press. p. E4.
Hollows, J. & Jancovich, M. (Eds.). (1995). Approaches to Popular Film. Manchester
& New York: Manchester University Press, U.S. distribution by St. Martin's
Press.
Hutcheon, L. (1990). An Epilogue: Postmodern Parody: History, Subjectivity, and
Ideology. Quarterly Review of Film and Video. Vol. 12, 125-133.
Hutcheon, L. (1988). A Poetics of Postmodernism: History, Theory, and Fiction.
New York: Routledge.
Jameson, F. (1991). Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Duke
University Press. Durham.
Kinder, M. (1990). Ideological Parody in the New German Cinema: The State of
Things, the Desire of Veronika Voss, and Germany pale Mother as
Postmodernist Rewriting of the Searchers, Sunset Boulevard, and Blond
Venus. Quarterly Review of Film and Video. Vol. 12, 73-103.
Kunstler, H.J., (1993). The Geography of Nowhere: The Rise and Decline of
America's Man-Made Landscape. New York, London, Toronto, Sydney,
Tokyo & Singapore: Simon & Schuster:
Lawson, T. (1999, October 15). Edward Norton and Brad Pitt Find Salvation in the
Dark "Fight Club." Detroit Free Press, p. A8.
Lyotard, J.F. (1979). The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press (1984).
McCarthy, T. (1991). Ideals and Illusions: On Reconstruction and Deconstruction in
Contemporary Critical Theory. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
McClure, K & McClure, L. (2001). Postmodern Parody: Zelig and the Rhetorical
Subversion of Documentary Form. Qualitative Research Reports in
Communication. Fall, 81-88.
Monaco, J. (1981). How to Read a Film: The Art, Technology, Language, History,
and Theory of Film and Media. (Rev. ed.) New York, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Nelmes, J. ed. (1996). An Introduction to Film Studies. London & New York:
Routledge.
Perlmutter, R. (1990). Zelig According to Bakhtin. Quarterly Review of Film and
Video. Vol. 12, 37-47.
Rickey, C. (1999, October 15). Throwing Punches at Modem Life. Philadelphia
Inquirer, p. A16.
Taubin, A. (1999, November). So Good It Hurts. Sight and Sound Magazine. p. 68
Tyson, Lois. (1999). Critical Theory Today: A User-Friendly Guide. New York &
London: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Williams, L. (Ed.) (1995). Viewing Positions: Ways of Seeing Film. New Brunswick,
New Jersey: Rutgers University Press.
Woods, T. (1999). Beginning Postmodernism. Manchester & New York: Manchester
University Press. U.S. distribution by St. Martin's Press.
