Fury of fists | Movies | The Guardian
https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/sep/14/1

This article is more than
26 years old
Fury of fists
This article is more than 26 years old
Fight Club has already been denounced as a film likely to inspire copy-cat violence. Sarah Gristwood talks to its director and stars, while on the
next page
, Derek Malcolm gives his verdict
ithin hours of the world premiere of
Fight Club
at the Venice film festival, stars and director alike were defending it against claims that it would inspire copy-cat violence. David Fincher, director of this story of young men rediscovering their masculinity by beating each other up, ironically seemed the least prepared to deal with the inevitable questions about violence, nihilism and the possibility of dangerous imitation. Edward Norton and Brad Pitt answered more articulately.
"The point is not to beat someone up," says Pitt. "The point is more to receive a punch. It's for connection, for direction, for feeling - for some answer to impending numbness. The film and the book on which it is based identify the problem, the malaise of our generation." He is 35, and Norton 30, with Fincher and the book's author, Oregon mechanic Chuck Palahniuk, both 37. "It's a wake-up call. But ours is a violent world and I don't see how you can ignore that."
Pitt had earlier said that he expected Fight Club to get a similar reaction to Seven, his last violent collaboration with Fincher. The film has not opened in the US yet, so the storm may prove to be contained in a teacup. But Pitt, who at Venice was asked whether he minded having his head shaved for the film ("No. Hair grows"), may yet find himself praying for such anodyne questions.
"It's ludicrous to suggest art should be limited by fear of copycat consequences," says Edward Norton (who after American History X is no stranger to controversy). "Should Nabokov not have written Lolita? Art exists to hold a mirror up to our flaws and our dysfunctions, to try to exorcise those flaws, and to fail to do so represents a kind of denial.
"You have to be sophisticated on a certain level as an audience. You have to distinguish between an idea suggested by a character in a film and the message of the film itself. When I read the book I found something on every page that expressed things I'd either felt or found in the people around me. It was the first thing I'd read that expressed the energy of my generation - or the lack thereof. This expresses the depths of the numbness and the despair.
"I'm not saying nobody over 45 is going to understand it..." But when many of your critics are bound to be older, such a suggestion is handy.
Fincher says accusations of fascism are "wildly amusing. I thought the film just seemed like a story that was worth telling. I thought it was a ripping yarn." He speaks with only a hint of self-mockery. Most recently director of The Game, originally a commercials man working in the very consumer world he now satirises, he made his feature film debut in 1992 with Alien 3.
"I'm afraid of people blowing stuff up, but I'm not afraid of people hitting each other," he says, asked about the danger of copycat violence. "Just as I don't think sex between consenting adults is any of my business, I don't think fighting between consenting adults is any of my business. I don't think we made the film with the intention of getting people all riled up and sending them out on to the streets.
"There are so many things in this book that struck a chord with me. It deals with the riptide of being male in today's society. It explores a lot of subconscious stuff. It's not about fighting, it's about being alive - about not pretending to be somebody else. Getting hit in the face is one of the ways to be present in the here and now. When somebody hits you in the mouth and you get that first rinse of salty something under your tongue, and you spit into your hand to see what it is, you are truly alive in the moment. It's not an orgasm, but it's a very specific reality."
He says that emasculation issues are not fight-club issues - a fight club is not about winning - but also that a hundred years of male DNA are not to be satisfied by a website and a double cafe latte. It's not an answer phrased so as to satisfy the film's critics.
At the Venice festival five years ago, Oliver Stone talked about Natural Born Killers. "Anyone who murders because of a movie is already a violently disturbed individual", he said. "You have to acknowledge the violence in yourself. The process of change begins with recognition and sometimes the path of excess leads to wisdom." The questions, and the answers, are strikingly similar. When Fincher runs short of words he could borrow from Stone, and from David Cronenberg after Crash. From Adrian Lyne after Lolita, too, maybe.
Read
Derek Malcolm's verdict
Useful sites
Explore more on these topics
Film
Fight Club
features
Share
Reuse this content
