David Fincher Reveals ‘Gone Girl’ Secrets and Whose Side He’s Really On (Q & A)
https://www.indiewire.com/features/general/david-fincher-reveals-gone-girl-secrets-and-whose-side-hes-really-on-q-a-190680/

David Fincher Reveals ‘Gone Girl’ Secrets and Whose Side He’s Really On (Q & A)
Read Next:
Cannes 2026 Movies Sold: ‘Atonement’ with Boyd Holbrook, Kenneth Branagh, and Hiam Abbass Lands at Kino Lorber
Newsletters
Search Icon
Close
Open Menu
Close
Search Icon
Open Search
Close Menu
Follow Us
Facebook
Instagram
Pinterest
YouTube
Alerts & Newsletters
By providing your information, you agree to our
Terms of Use
and our
We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google
and
Terms of Service
apply.
PMC Logo
David Fincher Reveals ‘Gone Girl’ Secrets and Whose Side He’s Really On (Q & A)
David Fincher Reveals 'Gone Girl' Secrets and Whose Side He's Really On (Q & A)
Ryan Lattanzio
Plus icon
ryan
Ryan Lattanzio
Executive Editor
ryanlattanzio
More stories by Ryan
Cannes 2026 Movies Sold: ‘Atonement’ with Boyd Holbrook, Kenneth Branagh, and Hiam Abbass Lands at Kino Lorber
Read more
The Zellners’ Starry Sci-Fi ‘Alpha Gang,’ Mahershala Ali in ‘Your Mother Your Mother Your Mother’ Set for TIFF Special Presentations
Read more
Danny Boyle’s Rupert Murdoch Drama ‘Ink’ to Open the Venice Film Festival
Read more
October 9, 2014 3:58 pm
Share
Share on Facebook
Post
google
Google Preferred
Share on LinkedIn
Show more sharing options
Share to Flipboard
Submit to Reddit
Pin it
Post to Tumblr
Email
Print This Page
Share on WhatsApp
“Gone Girl” is a movie that gnaws at you. At its surface, it’s a tightly sculpted thriller that burrows into the gruesome particulars of marriage at its most monstrous. Yet beneath the dismembered coupling of picture-pretty Nick and Amy Dunne, David Fincher and Gillian Flynn find the ugly truths rotting at the core of the American marriage complex.
We are told in life that the ideal romantic partner is someone who “brings out the best in you” or makes you “want to be your most you.” But then that flimsy illusion fades, and the miserably hitched must resign themselves to a lifetime of biting their tongues at dinner parties while privately dreaming of ruination. “That’s marriage!” as Amazing Amy (
Rosamund Pike
) says after she and Nick (
Ben Affleck
) have ruinously turned against each other. [BEWARE SPOILERS BELOW!]
Related Stories
David Fincher’s ‘Cliff Booth’ Movie Gets 2 Weeks in IMAX Before Netflix Premiere
Brad Pitt Returns as Cliff Booth in Surprise Super Bowl Spot for Netflix’s ‘Once Upon a Time in Hollywood’ Sequel
I was most interested in the idea of narcissism as a way to hold two people together
,” David Fincher said Thursday night at a Los Angeles Q&A with Film Independent’s Elvis Mitchell. “And the notion that we project the best version of ourselves not only to seduce somebody that we imagine to be perfect for us but also perfect for our narcissistic rejection. Then three years down the line the other person in the contract says, ‘I can’t get it up for this anymore. I can’t be your soulmate. I was never that person and I am done.’ And I love the wrath that inspired.”
“It’s that thing where you look over at your wife or girlfriend and you see them holding their tongue and then five years later they unleash all of their retribution. I thought that was funny,” Fincher also said following the rapturously applauded Film Independent screening. The raucous audience was, clearly, in on the jokiness of the film.
“The movie is funny. It’s funny because it’s horrifying.”
Fincher does not care about pedantic interpretations of his films. And he’s combative. Mitchell would make observations and Fincher would just click his tongue and go “huh” or “okay” or “no.”
As anyone who has seen a Fincher film knows, he’s a principled misanthrope. “I don’t think any place is safe if you bring human nature into it,” he told the full house of moviegoers. He doesn’t enjoy watching his films with a public audience. “
Nothing will convince you more that your movie is way too fucking long than opening the New York Film Festival…It’s like getting a Cesarian in front of 700 people
,” he said.
At the New York premiere (covered by Anne Thompson
here
), Fincher felt that “Gone Girl,” at two-and-a-half hours, was too long: “You see it in a room with a bunch of callous sophisticates and you just go, ‘God these [characters] just yak on and on. Will somebody shut these fucking people up?” (Read about how the film was edited in our interview
here
Even so, it’s a movie that sets people talking, and it follows you home at night. There’s an ongoing misogyny debate, which is the nature of the beast when you’ve got an angry female protagonist who’s both a victim of suburban entrapment and psychotic. “Gone Girl” is constantly shifting alliances. But it doesn’t
tell
you how to feel so much as show you how
is feeling.
“The movie is completely hyperbolic. It never occurred to me that you could have a movie that was a mystery and that could hand the baton off to this absurdist thriller and then that could hand off the baton and become this satire,” Fincher said.
So who’s side is the director on, anyway? “
I root for Rosamund
. There are parts of the movie where I go, oh yeah, ‘Go Amy.’ I love Amy. I love seeing her planning out when she’s going to take her own life. I think that’s hilarious.”
Below are more highlights from the interview, which dove deep into Fincher’s directorial anxieties, why he can’t re-watch his older movies and what drove him into moviemaking. As a child watching movies he thought,
This is an insane way to make a living. Where do I go to surrender
How does Fincher engineer dread?
“It’s not so much dread. It’s that everything is balanced. I want to see arguments between characters where I agree with them, and situations that, depending on the outcome, it’s going to be horrible for one of the participants. I’m interested when you have a hard time rooting for one side as opposed to the other because it’s going to come at a cost.”
Are we over-thinking “Gone Girl”?
“The game Ben gives her, Mastermind, [has] absolutely no importance. There is no significance at all. I think it was the only one we could legally clear. And of course everyone goes up to me and says, “Oh yeah, Mastermind.” Red herrings are fun but they are also irritating and distracting.”
Why Ben Affleck?
He fits hand-in-glove with what Nick has to be. He has to be the homecoming king. In a movie where you have a pivotal scene where a person stands next to a poster of his missing wife and is smiling, that’s something he knows how to do. I could go through Google. I could just show him one: ‘I want one of these.” He gets his feet run over with a steamroller. And then he gets his ankles run over. Then he gets his shins run over, then his knees and then both femurs, his pelvis, and his lower back. You just get crushed. Ben has been through that. He knows what it means to be tossed by the 35 foot waves of public perception. He also has great wit about it. He knows it has nothing to do with you. At a certain point it has nothing to do with you at all. The symbol of you becomes more important than your actual participation.”
Why draws Fincher to such dark material?
“There are plenty of movies where people turn out okay and justice is served. The curse of working in cinema is that nothing is treated as accidental and offhanded. We’ve been fed this idea for a hundred years that the reason movies cost so much is because it’s all been tested. Everything has been worked out for your enjoyment. Why would a movie cost $150 million dollars? ‘Because we had to make sure it was just so’… I also like movies where the audience [recoils]. That’s as valid as cheering for the exploding Death Star.”
Have studios ever tried to change one of his endings?
“They wanted the ending of ‘Seven’ to be ‘Fatal Attraction.’ They wanted it to be Brad in a car, driving on sidewalks to get across town because Gwyneth was drawing a hot bath and Kevin Spacey was breaking into their apartment. That’s valid if you’re a movie studio. You want something tangible that you can point to. But instead she dies. It’s better. She’s been dead for 14 hours. She dies offscreen horribly.”
Daily Headlines
Daily Headlines covering Film, TV and more.
Subscribe
More from IndieWire
Best Of
Christopher Nolan Movies, Ranked from ‘The Dark Knight’ and ‘Tenet’ to ‘Oppenheimer’ and ‘The Odyssey’
Filmmaker Toolkit
How ‘Star City’ Turned the Soviet Space Program Into TV’s Most Thrilling Puzzle Box
Features
Sydney Pollack Was One of the Great Directors of His Generation — A New Book Breaks Down His Approach
Wet Hot Comedy Writing
Don’t Let the Silly Skits Fool You, ‘Gail Daughtry’ Is a Seriously Well-Written Screenplay
Interview... With the Vampire
‘The Vampire Lestat’ Stars Break Down a Cathartic, Climactic Episode 6 — and What’s Next for Lestat and Louis
Justice for Ken Leung
‘Industry’ Emmy Snub: Prestige TV Is a Moniker Series Are Born with but Rarely Earn — Opinion
Daily Headlines
Daily Headlines covering Film, TV and more.
By providing your information, you agree to our
Terms of Use
and our
We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google
and
Terms of Service
apply.
Must Read
Features
The 25 Best Movies of 2025
Features
The 10 Best TV Series of 2025
Best of 2025
The 24 Best Film and TV Performances of 2025
More From IndieWire
Film Review
‘The Odyssey’ Review: Christopher Nolan Defies the Gods with a Staggering Epic About Fate, Family, and the Future of Living in a Broken World
Exclusive
Dead Meat YouTube Channel Launches ‘Fresh Meat’ Anthology Competition for Horror Filmmakers
PMC Logo
Most Popular
Randolph Mantooth, Firefighter-Paramedic Johnny Gage on ‘Emergency!,’ Dies at 80
‘Moana’ Cast Guide: Every Live-Action Character vs. the Original Animation
What King Charles 'Made Very Clear' To Prince Harry Before Reunion With Meghan Markle & Kids
Vinod Khosla to Buy Seattle Seahawks for $9.6 Billion
You may also like
Netflix Q2 Earnings Results In-Line With Expectations, Stock Drops on Lower Q3 Outlook
rollingstone
Ava Max Takes Back Her Power on New Single ‘Lovin Myself’
ABC & NBC To Air Donald Trump’s Primetime Speech On Streaming News Channels Only Amid Reports He’ll Bring Up Stolen Election Claims
Flores v. NFL Discrimination Case to Remain in Court, Judge Says
PMC Logo
Our Sites
