Memento_Academic
In repo

CLCWeb: Compar ative Liter ature and Cultur e CLCWeb: Compar ative Liter ature and Cultur e
ISSN 1481-4374
Purdue Univ ersity Pr ess ©Pur due Univ ersity
Volume 4 (2002) Issue 3 Article 3
Nolan 's Mement o, Memor y, and Recognition Nolan 's Mement o, Memor y, and Recognition
Adrian Gar gett
London, United Kingdom
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /docs.lib.pur due.edu/clcweb
Part of the Compar ative Liter ature Commons , and the Critical and Cultur al Studies Commons
Dedicated t o the dissemination of scholarly and pr ofessional information, Purdue Univ ersity Pr ess selects, de velops, and distributes
quality r esour ces in se veral key subject ar eas for which its par ent univ ersity is famous, including business, technology , health,
veterinar y medicine, and other selected disciplines in the humanities and sciences.
CLCWeb: Compar ative Liter ature and Cultur e, the peer-r eviewed, full-text, and open-access learned journal in the humanities and
social sciences, publishes new scholarship following tenets of the discipline of compar ative liter ature and the field of cultur al
studies designated as " compar ative cultur al studies. " Publications in the journal ar e index ed in the Annual Bibliogr aphy of English
Language and Liter ature (Chadwy ck-Heale y), the Ar ts and Humanities Citation Index (Thomson Reuters ISI), the Humanities Index
(Wilson), Humanities International Complete (EBSCO), the International Bibliogr aphy of the Modern Language Association of
America, and Scopus (Else vier). The journal is affiliated with the Pur due Univ ersity Pr ess monogr aph series of Books in Compar ative
Cultur al Studies. Contact: < clcweb@pur due.edu >
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Gargett, Adrian. "Nolan 's Mement o, Memor y, and Recognition. " CLCWeb: Compar ative Liter ature and Cultur e 4.3
(2002): < https:/ /doi.or g/10.7771/1481-4374.1163 >
This text has been double-blind peer r eviewed b y 2+1 exper ts in the field.
The abo ve text, published b y Pur due Univ ersity Pr ess ©Pur due Univ ersity , has been downloaded 19350 times as of
03/02/26. Note: the download counts of the journal' s material ar e since Issue 9.1 (Mar ch 2007), since the journal' s
format in pdf (instead of in html 1999-2007).
This document has been made a vailable thr ough Pur due e-Pubs, a ser vice of the Pur due Univ ersity Libr aries. Please contact
epubs@pur due.edu for additional information.
This is an Open Access journal. This means that it uses a funding model that does not char ge readers or their institutions for
access. Readers ma y freely r ead, download, cop y, distribute, print, sear ch, or link t o the full texts of ar ticles. This journal is
covered under the CC B Y-NC-ND license .
UNIVERSITY PRESS <http://www.thepress.purdue.edu >
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture
ISSN 1481-4374 < http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb >
Purdue University Press ©Purdue University
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture , the peer-reviewed, full-text, and open-access lea rned journal in
the humanities and social sciences, publishes new s cholarship following tenets of the discipline of co mparative
literature and the field of cultural studies design ated as "comparative cultural studies." In addition to the
publication of articles, the journal publishes revi ew articles of scholarly books and publishes resear ch material
in its Library Series. Publications in the journal are indexed in the Annu al Bibliography of English Language and
Literature (Chadwyck-Healey), the Arts and Humaniti es Citation Index (Thomson Reuters ISI), the Humani ties
Index (Wilson), Humanities International Complete ( EBSCO), the International Bibliography of the Moder n
Langua-ge Association of America, and Scopus (Elsev ier). The journal is affiliated with the Purdue Uni versity
Press monog-raph series of Books in Comparative Cul tural Studies. Contact: < clcweb@purdue.edu >
CLCWeb Volume 4 Issue 3 (September 2002) Article 3 Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4/iss3/3> Contents of CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002) << http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4/iss3/ >> Abstract : Adrian Gargett, in his paper "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition," analyses Christopher Nolan's film Memento. Gargett employs Deleuzian film theory in a general considera- tion of the relationship between thought and film. Gargett proposes that Memento acts as a type of intellectual stimulant that has the viewer decip hering a puzzle in process: what is identified in Memento is the way in which memory and the work of memory a re presented in the film's narra- tive construct. In his analysis Gargett argues that memory is not added on; rather, it is already present, and that the Deleuzian abstract quality do es not lie in the negative relation to representa- tion, externality, and figure. And it is there in t he way memory is present: abstraction is not pre- sent simply because memory lacks a given determinat ion, and thus all that is apparent in the film is memory in the abstract. Abstraction here means a particular type of filmic presentation and it is the employment of abstraction as an already determi ned form of film construction. This presenta- tion and what allows the film to be abstract is the confrontation with the conventions of abstrac- tion. Engaging with abstraction within abstraction must be understood in terms of the construction and in terms of a response to the construction/stru cture of the film, in which narrative/subject matter can only be identified with their emergence from the way in which particular sequenc- es/scenes work.
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 2 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> Adrian GARGETT Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition Perhaps it is possible to start with memory. With m emories that are placed before the eye. What has been remembered here? In Christopher Nolan's fi lm Memento (2000), although the recognisa- ble becomes far distanced from the describable, it never becomes totally separable. The increasing frailty of reference the more tenuous those links, the more that becomes the subject matter itself. Reverberations, the chaos of multiplying associatio ns (conscious and subconscious), memories of an already-known, especially an already-narrated th e traces of a describable, all conspire towards the instability of what is assumed to be perceived. Memory thus not as a pleasant reverie but as anarchic. In an unstable creation where fugitive chains of as sociations undermine a hold on perception, repetitions of all kinds are a provisional order. I nterruptions, shifts and collapsings of endless re- currence move considerations from the spatial to an unfolding of time. Repetition is itself a meta- phor since nothing can be repeated. Some thing is a lways surrogate for something else. Temporar- ily speaking, actions extend backwards in memory an d forwards in expectation. They can never coincide. So repetition automatically engages with duration, and more particularly duration attend- ed to -- time that makes itself not invisible. Time structures via repetition in a one plus one sense, a molecular sense, hence its form making capacity. Repetition's simultaneous capacity to order and disorder, neither less anarchic, its attendant meaning no less so. The narrative is structured in a one plus one molecular way, but a form -- that wh ich is differentiated, knows where to stop. Some other process or event limits or changes that multiplication. It differentiates the undifferen- tiated or deconstructs that form that limits. Residues of past disturbances forever bear their tr ace. Present and potential events register cause, effecting new casual repercussions. As impr ints of an event, representations present evi- dence of time and contingencies to come. The narrat ive line changes form, but there is no possibil- ity of unravelling such chains of complexity. The i nterchangeability of cause and effect -- the inde- cipherable -- produces acute anxiety, haunting the narrative. This failure to mediate meaning in- duces deep insecurities as to the attaining of sign ificance. "I suppose I was looking for Marlowe's ghost in modern L.A.": What if the grasp of one's l ife story were incomplete through neurological disorder? It is this problem which is excellently d ramatised in Memento . Nolan's film is probably the first film about a revenger -- here of a raped, murdered wife -- who can only glory in his bloody vengeance for a matter of seconds because he has lost his short-term memory. Because the artificial style in which the story is presente d identifies it as a fiction, its status as a creat ion of the human imagination can become its subject. The f ilm proposes an ironic re-interpretation of the private-eye genre in which the conventional pattern of heroic self-determination played out by Leonard Shelby is contradicted by a self-conscious critique of the formula carried by the film's structure, a critique that sees the hero's control over his world as an illusion. In his celebrated private-eye manifesto The Simple Art of Murder , Raymond Chandler contrasts Dashiell Hammett's putative realism with the artifi cial contrivances of the classical detective story. As Chandler saw it, "Hammett gave murder back to th e people who commit it for reasons, not just to provide a corpse; and with the means at hand, no t with handwrought duelling pistols, curare, and tropical fish. He put these people down on pap er as they are, and he made them talk and think in the language they customarily used for the se purposes" (16). In contrast to Chandler's emphasis of realism, Nolan's version of the formula involves the nostalgia of noir as a means of undercutting the generic experience itself. In Memento , Nolan evokes the basic characteristics of a traditional genre deliberately in order to bring th e audience to see the genre as an embodiment of an inadequate and destructive myth. Although Memento features a milieu that is ostensibly realis- tic, its self-conscious visual style qualifies this assumption. The protagonist is an insurance investigator and wh at the reverse chronology of the movie bril- liantly achieves is the ironic, gradually unfolding suspicion that the loss of short-term memory can be a semi-willed insurance policy as well as brain damage. A series of overlapping timed sequenc- es each offer us a more complicated view of the pro tagonist's history. Memento understands that
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 3 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> one method of communicating the behaviour of memory is to create a parallel activity for the au- dience to experience. For once the "objectivity" of the reverse chronological sequence convention feels both legitimate artistically and morally cree py because we repeatedly have access to the im- mediate past which our hero's brain crucially denie s him. "We drove out Highway 70 and started moving past th e trucks into rolling ranch country. I was driving; Degarmo sat moodily in the corner, his han ds deep in his pockets. I watched the fat, straight rows of orange trees spin by like the spok es of a wheel. I listened to the shine of the tires on the pavement and I felt tired and stale from lac k of sleep and too much emotion" (Chandler, The Lady in the Lake 158) ... "There are no individual statements, ther e never are. Every state- ment is the product of a machinic assemblage, in ot her words, of collective agents of enuncia- tion (take ‘collective agents' to mean not peoples or societies but multiplicities). The proper name ( nom propre ) does not designate an individual, it is on the co ntrary when the individual opens up to the multiplicities pervading him or her, at the outcome of the most severe operation of deper- sonalization, that he or she acquires his or her tr ue proper name. The proper name is the instan- taneous apprehension of multiplicity" (Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus 37-38). "Cine- ma," writes Deleuze, "does not give an image to whi ch movement has been added, it immediately gives us the movement -- image" ( Cinema 1: The Movement Image 215). This is not so much time frozen, but time infinitely speeded up, not so much movement arrested as movement anticipated. Anticipation functions predominately throughout Memento . The narrative may be seen as an in- determinate map in which conceptual and material "d ensities" co-exist offering new models for the use of textual/filmic information. The narrative li nes which flow through the film are partial maps which only imperfectly predict perceptual experienc e. They play with instrumentality at the same time they use instrumentality to disrupt the conven tions of narrative. The chaotic universe in which the viewer is submerged is on the verge of co llapse. One consequence of this collapse is that it is no longer clear what is and is not a sign. Th e perceptual space of the film is not simple and homogeneous: there are rifts and inexplicable trans itions, abrupt appearances and disappearances which set up indeterminate conditions and render in formation segments incomplete and tentative. They effect a kind of blockage, making the narrativ e go blank right at the moment when conven- tional composition would dictate some kind of resol ution. The structure of Memento is deter- minedly non-linear. The same sequences are seen fr om difference viewpoints, alternatively clari- fying and confusing perceptions. It is edited like a random selection of mosaic tiles, but when the last section eventually snaps into place, a surpris e sets the whole intrigue in motion again. In Cinema 2 Deleuze works towards a re-inscription of temporali ty across every element of film. According to Gilles Deleuze, this new image, this n ew mutation strives to become "truly thought and thinking, even if it has to become 'difficult' in order to do this": "What is in the present is wh at the image 'represents,' but not the image itself, w hich ... the system of the relationships between its elements, that is, a set of relationships of ti me from which the variable present only flows" ( Cinema 2: The Time Image xii). Deleuze indicates the malleable quality of t ime in cinema where "sheets" of past can co-exist in a non-chronologica l order. The question then becomes: not how are Forms extracted from or released in things, but under what conditions can something new or singular be produced "outside" them? This concept o f the abstract Deleuze develops along with Guattari with the "abstract machine" -- opposed to the abstract in the ordinary sense -- the "And" which moves outside. To move from the primary/criti cal sense of the abstract to this second "af- firmative" version is to transform the idea of the abstract. For as long as one regards the abstract as Form withdrawn from Matter, one things in terms of ‘possibilities' and their ‘realizations' (or transcendental or dialectical conditions of such po ssibility). The basic assumption remains that the world is logically congruent with possibilities giv en by abstractions, even if all such possibilities are not realised or instantiated or all the categories under which they fall are not known. But once one allows for a world that is dis-unified, incongruous , composed of multiple divergent paths, one can think of abstract "virtualities" which in contrast with abstract "possibilities," are quite real, even though they are not "actualised." One starts to see the force or potential of things for which there exists no abstract concept, since their "effectuati on" would go off in too many directions or "sens- es" at once. In Dialogues , Deleuze and C. Parnet call such potentials "virtu al" (64-84). Thus, the
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 4 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> virtual may be said to be abstract in a different s ense from the possible: abstract machines are said to be real although not concrete, actual altho ugh not effectuated. They have the abstraction of immanent force rather than transcendental form - - the abstract virtuality within things of other different things, of other possible worlds in our w orld, other histories in our history. They are rhizomatic, serial, differential, complications rat her than categorical generalising and purifying. It is this concept of the abstract that Deleuze app lies to cinema. If he sees films as abstract it is not because they remove all narrative or digesis an d retreat into pure filmic self-reference, but because they take singular elements from all over, past and present, and reassemble them, mixing them up in the strange non-narrative continuity of a sort of "abstract machine." The motivation is thus not the removal or absence of narrative, but a n attempt to attain an "outside" of other enig- matic/strange connections through a free, abstract And , which takes over the movement and time of the film. One must put this sort of abstraction first, see it as first, and so take narration as on ly "an indirect consequence that flows from movement a nd time, rather than the other way around" ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 222-23). For film is not a "code" of which abstra ction would be the self-reference; it is an abstract machine that has movement and time as specific abstract "virtualities" which then get "effectuated" in part icular conditions -- narrative is only one restrict ed possibility. A significant process in the Deleuzian "time-image" is the "recollection-image" (an actualisation of a virtuality) as in the life of the recollector, stretching the structure of the film, fragmenting its linearity. It does not give us the past, "but only represents the former present that the past 'was'" ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 54). This effect can be seen in the memory section s of Memento where these images are moving the narrative back an d forth through virtual time spaces. The im- mediate now presence of the cinema is perfect for t he form of the recollection-image, as, "it is in the present that we make a memory, in order to make use of it in the future when the present will be past" ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 55). Developing this image analysis Deleuze recogn ises two possible types of time -- image, one grounded in th e past, the other in the present. In this situa- tion the past is preserved in time and should not b e seen as un-actualised recollection-images: "it is the virtual element into which we penetrate to l ook for the 'pure recollection' which will become actual in a 'recollection-image'" ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 98). Deleuze derives this cinematic feature from his philosophic thought concerning the perception of memory: "Memory is not in us; it is we who move in a being-memory, a world-memory " ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 101). Via extrapolation Deleuze suggests that in film there a re circles, or sheets of the past, which coexist between past and present, each sheet having its own characteristics, "accents" (peaks of view) and "aspects" (regions/layers): its "shining point" and its "dominant themes." Film can place us in the past, and then choose one of these sheets. When we are placed in a certain sheet of time, that time, whether it is past, present, or future "becomes" present. Thus, in a film such a Mement , the past/present/future are no longer in any semblance of succession, but are implicated simulta neously. The film is structured with separate and different sheets of time -- which for us become the different "presents" of the film, each sheet can then be contradicted, obliterated, substituted, re-created, and returned. Here in the peaks of the present, the time-image shows its signifying po wer to push the ineffable, to make "actual" placed "de-actualized" in being related and aligned with virtual sheets of the past. Memento 's nar- rative lines define and construct continuums within "memory-ages." What are unclear "flashbacks" become more like recollection-images of our indepen dent memory world. With Memento Nolan creates a film which has one single character: thou ght. What Nolan achieves is a utilization of the concept and feel of memory without impoverishing it by simply making it the object of flashbacks. Thus the stretches of sheets of past can just as vi ably be false recollections or imaginations or a past that is forgotten but that we have been given access to -- an opening up of "past" and there- fore "time" in the film. The feelings of Leonard Shelby are spread over diff erent sheets of the past, forming an inter- locking sheet of their own. The film goes beyond th e central character's construction towards feel- ings and beyond feelings towards the thought of whi ch his is a character. Shelby is thus a charac- ter "of" thought, of film-thought. In the opening s equences of Memento sections of scenes appear
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 5 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> later to re-appear in a wider context to form a mor e cohesive whole and thus become an echo of an earlier echo of what was to come. From a basis i n space and movement the image has moved to occupy topological schemes centering on time and thought, and in Deleuzian terminology the screen has become "the cerebral membrane where imme diate and direct confrontations take place between the past and he future ... independent of a ny fixed point" ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 126). Deleuze's "crystalline image" encompasses de-actual ized peaks of the present and virtual sheets of past actually "describing" the setting be ing a "cinema of the seer" ( Cinema 2: The Time- Image 137). This form develops into crystalline narratio n, of pure optical and sound situations, with sequence takes over from sensory-motor montage , and wherein movement is "zero" or "in- cessant" such that the anomalies of movement become the essential point. This is part of the scheme of the time-image from which movement derive s, which is then "false movement" pro- duced by direct time-images, and thus non-chronolog ical time (movement = time, false time therefore false movement). Deleuze positions the po wer of the "false" at the centre of a new style of cinema. This falsifying narration structures Memento . The elements of Nolan's film change con- stantly with the relations of time into which they enter and the terms with their connections. This regime of the image works to arrest the presupposit ion of reality, stops narration vainly attempt- ing to refer to a true/correct form, and replaces t hese with the cinematographic "powers of life." In Nolan's private-eye story the hero's position as sp ectator is not always a privileged one. Converse- ly, in the Deleuzian scheme objective and subjectiv e images are stripped of their division and iden- tification in favour of a new circuit where they ar e completely replaced, or contaminate each other, or are decomposed and recomposed. Thus in Memento the image (op and son; image and sound) in echoing that to come, includes the before and af ter and also the personal and impersonal in one present. This practice is the process via which the direct time-image, breaking with indirect repre- sentation and the flow of time feeds a free indirec t discourse, operating in reality. Since the rape and murder of his wife, former insur ance investigator Leonard Shelby has no short-term memory. Having vowed to seek out and kil l his wife's murderer whose initials he knows to be "J.G." and whose car-registration number he h as tattooed on his body, he writes notes and takes Polaroid pictures to remind him how the inves tigation is progressing. The story unfolds in reverse chronology: L.A. Shelby sits on his bed in a shabby room at the Discount Inn motel, talking to an unknown person o n the phone. 'You say we've talked before?' he mutter s. 'I don't remember that ... Yeah, it was summer. I remember that. I remember everything up until my in jury. I just can't make new memories. So I can't re - member talking to you. What did we talk about?' He gets up from his bed and wanders through the bath- room, the receiver tucked under his chin. 'Oh Sammy Jankis. I guess I told you about Sammy to help you understand. Sammy's story helps me understand my ow n situation. He paces around the bathroom. 'Sammy wrote himself a tremendous amount of notes, but he got mixed up. I have a more graceful solutio n to the memory problem.' He begins to undo his shirt ; his upper body is covered in tattoos of names and date. 'I'm disciplined, and organised. I use habit and routine to make my life possible, Sammy had no drive. No reason to make it work.' In the bathroom mirror, we see Shelby remove his shirt, across his chest in a huge tattoo. It read JOHN G RAPED AND MURDERED MY WIFE, Shelby stares at his reflection for a se- cond before continuing his conversation. 'Me? Yeah ... I got a reason'. The implications of Nolan's self-conscious view of fantasy/memory are most fully expressed in the way he depicts his hero. As a detective, Leonard Sh elby embodies the values such heroes repre- sent. He aspires to actions on a grand scale, osten sibly motivated by ideals of cour- age/justice/altruism. By self-consciously playing a gainst the "hard-boiled" formula's realist preten- tiousness; however, Nolan at a deeper level calls t hese values into question. In Memento the pri- vate-eye mythology is revealed as inadequate and de structive. Primarily, Memento is a detective story, as Leonard makes clear to the undercover cop Teddy, who claims to be helping him to track down his wife's killer. "Facts," he says, "not memo ries. That's how you investigate." Keeping track of his search with scribbled notes, clues tattooed on his body and sheaves of documents, Leonard anchors his investigation in what he believes are c oncrete givens. But each time, the film reveals the context for his suppositions, Leonard is shown to be mistaken. Memento progresses to decon- struct the noir genre -- a remarkable psychological-puzzle film, a crime conundrum that expands
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 6 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> the narrative possibilities of noir , and in the film its detective hero Leonard Shelby turns into a sur- rogate for the spectator, the reverse narrative log ic forcing us to embark on the kind of investiga- tive work Shelby is engaged in. Memento , in contrast to earlier versions of the genre in w hich the narrative was constructed to validate the hero's va lues, concludes by revealing them as paranoid projections cloaking the protagonist's own sense of impotence in the face of the byzantine com- plexity and evil of modern life. Nolan engenders the genre's tendency to confound ou r expectations, with the conceptual twist of linking the flow of narrative information to Leo nard's mental condition. One of the ways Leonard attempts to navigate the series of unconnected inst ants that constitute his experience of time is by taking Polaroids. Each image has a scribbled addend a: Teddy's reads "Do not believe his lies" the picture of Natalie, the waitress Leonard hooks up w ith, has "She's lost someone too. She'll help you out of pity." For Leonard and the viewer these memory cue-cards are clues in the murder hunt but there is substantial and detailed evidence posi tioned throughout the film's convoluted narrative structure to suggest that Leonard's "facts" do not necessarily relate the complete story: needing to assert his own sense of power and control over a th reatening world, Shelby constructs repeatedly theories from inadequate and ill-digested informati on and these theories are invariably at odds with the actual situation, making him ultimately re sponsible for the disaster that concludes the action. His vulnerability and "moral" deformity app ear metaphorically in his neurological condition: In his room at the flea-bitten Discount Inn motel, Shelby pieces together photographic fragments of hi s life on a wall-sized map of the City tacked above his be d. First he produces a Polaroid of he motel itself. 'Discount Inn.' He sticks the photograph to the map . Then a picture of a young brunette woman. 'Natali e.' That too is attached to the map. Next Shelby produc es a photograph of a polished silver Jaguar. 'My ca r.' He glances up at the Polaroid of a middle-aged man, pinned to a far corner of the map. Shelby reads fr om the bottom of the picture 'Teddy.' Getting down fro m the bed, he glances at a photo copy of a driver's li- cence on his chest of drawers. The same man peers o ut from the mugshot at the top of the page. Shelby notices his name. 'John Edward Gammel.' He looks pe rplexed then quietly angry. 'This guy told me his name was Teddy.' Standing on his bed again, Shelby pulls down the picture of Teddy/Gammel, and turns i t over. Taking a felt pen, he writes in capitals on t he white plastic strip on the back of the picture ' DON'T BE- LIEVE HIS LIES'. L.A.'s grid-like network of streets makes it easy t o get close to your destination, but very difficult to locate it precisely. Most side streets look the same and sometimes when you?re just a couple of blocks away you might as well be in another univers e. Memento is like a filmic jigsaw puzzle which enlists the spectator's imagination in assembling t he fragments supplied by the narrative, but which also provides its own "solution" at the end. On Natalie's Polaroid, for example, a line has been scribbled out, a detail that instils doubt abo ut her faithfulness long before it becomes clear she is exploiting mercilessly Leonard's condition f or her own ends. In the best noir tradition its hard to trust any of the characters. The film's opening sequence establishes the narrati ve pattern: a hand holds up a Polaroid pho- tograph of a murder scene which slowly un-develops, fading to darkness. Subsequently a murder plays in rewind -- the victims blood seeps up a wal l back into his head wound, bullet cartridges spin back into the gun's chamber -- erasing the act of killing. At this point the film reverts to a forward motion, events leading up to this murder ar e told in sequences that appear in reverse or- der. Fragments of scenes which initially appear inc omprehensible. It is only when the film loops out from small details to a larger context that the narrative line begins to form a more cohesive whole. Memento 's prelude ushers the viewer into a wonderous piece which imitates brain function in itself being like a sizzle of connections across the collective synapses as it takes you on multipl e detective trails into the past. Leonard's reliance on his remembered past -- he claims to recall his life before the murder of his wife -- is one of the films structural foundations. Running parallel wit h the fractured eternal present of the Leonard's real -time existence is the story of a case he investi- gated when working for an insurance firm: that of S ammy Jankis, who was afflicted with similar short-term memory loss. In an extended black-and-white sequence, Leonard re lates by phone (to a cop we assume is Teddy) how he was suspicious of Jankis who despite his condition could nonetheless administer the correct insulin doses to his diabetic wife. The cl aim was refused; Sammy's wife attempted to snap
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 7 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> her husband out of his amnesia by making him repeat edly inject her with insulin shots. However this strategy fails tragically, leaving her dead an d Sammy adrift in a memory-less limbo. Confined, like Leonard, in the film's looping reverse traject ory, we invest this sequence with validity. Subse- quent events come to undermine such verisimilitude: at gunpoint Teddy relates that he has com- prehensively revised Leonard's memory of the Sammy Jankis case to avoid the facts that his own wife who survived the assault, died after he over-a dministered insulin to her. Jankis was a conman whom Leonard, in a psychological state of extreme d enial, has reconstituted as a pitiful victim: The lobby of a cheap motel. Shelby is greeted by h is friend Teddy. 'Lenny.' Shelly turns unamused. 'I t's Leonard. Like I told you before." Teddy holds the door open for him. 'Did you? I must a forgot.' 'I guess I already told you about my con di- tion.' 'Ah well, only everytime I see you.' Outside , Teddy steps towards a car. Shelby sakes his head. 'My car.' 'This is your car.' 'Oh you're in a playful m ood.' Shelby produces a Polaroid of his own car, a Jaguar. The real thing is parked next to the first car. 'It 's not good for you to make fun of someone's handic ap.' 'Just trying to have a little fun.' In the Jaguar, the two men drive along a suburban road. Teddy turn s to Selby. 'So, where to Sherlock?' 'I got a lead on a place.' Shelby produces another Polaroid. He hands it to Teddy. 'Oh, what the hell you want to go there for? ' 'You know it?' 'Yeah, it's just this fucked up buil ding. Why'd you want to go there?' 'I don't remembe r.' Eventually they pull up outside the building. Teddy heads towards it. Shelby walks behind. He pulls an other Polaroid from his pocket. It shows Teddy, smiling. He flips it over. On the reverse is written, in nea t capital letters: DON'T BELIEVE HIS LIES. HE IS THE ONE KILL HIM. Teddy tells Leonard he is the cop who helped invest igate the rape of his wife. Since the police dropped the investigation, Teddy has been finding c riminals with the initials "J.G." for Leonard to kill. He elaborates this version of the narrative t o a now distraught Leonard. The film's apex is to end with a questioning of its protagonists innocenc e: "Do I lie to myself to be happy?" Leonard asks after Teddy recounts his version of Catherine Shelby's death. "In your case Teddy, I will," he says as he writes down the cop's car-registration n umber, incriminating falsely him as his wife's killer and signing effectively his death warrant. I t is the height of the film's achievement that this final scene -- which apparently completes the narra tive jigsaw -- should cloud Leonard's motives. The conclusion is tantalisingly enigmatic, scatteri ng any sense of certainty that may have become apparent during the multiple lines that comprise th e narrative structures. In The Maltese Falcon Humphrey Bogart's explanation of events unlike Shel by's, does not re- flect his own inadequacies; instead it is presented as an accurate re-creation of the actual state of affairs. Bogart is always right, and he always acts for the best. The "hard-boiled" formula is con- structed to excuse the hero's behaviour by means of such rationalizations. Nolan's version of the story, however, allows no such refuge in thematic a ssertions of verisimilitude or morality. Faced with the condition of his own limited vision Shelby can only look confused and defeated: trapped in his destructive rationalizations and unable to comp rehend the insecurities that lie beneath them, he cannot imagine how he could have contributed to an alternative outcome: "The rains are over. The hills are still green and in the valley across the Hollywood hills you can see snow on the high mountains. The fur stores are advertising their ann ual sales. The call houses that specialise in six- teen-year-old virgins are doing a land-office busin ess. And in Beverley Hills the jacaranda trees are beginning to bloom" (Chandler, "The Little Sister" 5). Deleuzian film theory engages a general considerati on of the relationship between thought and film -- the image should "force thought to think it self as much as thinking the whole" ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 158). Memento acts as a type of intellectual stimulant that has t he viewer deci- phering a puzzle in process. Deleuze identifies the concept with image; the image is for itself in the concept. Violence, for example, should be of the im age in its vibrations rather than in representa- tion, while the notion of fractured perception shou ld be brought out by composition. Thought is positioned as the object of the image, becoming the higher purpose of the essence of cinema. Deleuze suggests that cinema should not just film t he world (narrow) but rather "belief" in this world (wide), for as in philosophy we should relinq uish attempts to discover absolute truths and replace the model of knowledge with belief in the " crystalline image." The "interstice" between images in the time-cinema is vital -- a spacing which means that each image is extracted from the void and then reverts i nto it. The interstice is like a space/instant be-
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 8 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> tween images, and therefore an operation of "differ entiation of potential" that engenders some- thing new. These images break any join between them , a shock to get the viewer to choose living thinking over dead thought. A film such as Memento attempts to remove the reading of images by association (montage) which makes the succession of images into a chain, each slave in meaning to the next by a replacement with a division of thi s one-being mode of film for "the method of 'and' this and that." This leads to irrational cuts engendering false continuity. The image itself be- comes reflective, living. An attempt to mirror the process of thoughts is now replaced by the irra- tional cut, and independent images, each deframing the previous, thus creating and inducing thought immediately in film and viewer: "The outsid e or obverse of the images has replaced the whole, at the same time as the interstice or the cu t has replaced association" ( Cinema 2: The Time-Image 214). Deleuze views cinema as being the highest ex ercise in thought, extracted from and in a sense integrated with the basic images and sounds. The time-image gives a direct repre- sentation of time in its pure form. Movement-images are subsumed/subordinate to time. In the time-image aspects of the movement-image gain a new sense of montage/frame/sound take on the appearance of something "different" such that c inema becomes "analytic of the image": Deleuze's cinema is a plastic mass, an a-signifying and a-syntaxic material. What can film "essen- tially" do? Deleuze re-inscribes cinema virtually w ith its own philosophical apparatus which comes to the fore in films such as Memento . What is identified in Memento is the way in which memory -- the work of memory -- is present- ed by the way the film works. Memory is not added on., it is already present. The Deleuzian ab- stract quality does not lie in the negative relatio n to representation/externality/figure. It is there in the way memory is present. Abstraction is not prese nt simply because memory lacks a given de- termination, and thus all that is apparent in the f ilm is memory in the abstract. Abstraction here means a particular type of filmic presentation. It is the employment of abstraction as an already determined form of film construction. This presenta tion and what allows the film to be abstract is the confrontation with the conventions of abstracti on. Engaging with abstraction within abstraction must be understood in terms of the construction; in other words in terms of a response to the con- struction/structure of the film, in which narrative /subject matter can only be identified with their emergence from the way in which particular sequence s/scenes work. What is significant is that Memento affirms the presence of memory by holding and prese nting memory within timed space; the dual presence of memory within the film forms p art of the timing of space. Timed space is part of the way in which the film works. Film works in remembering in the abeyance of destru ction and by figuring complex relations. Within the generalised field of film this relation may be generic, or it may involve the specific sub- ject of the specific work. With Memento there is a dual work of memory -- two interrelated forms of memory are present. The first emerges as part of the film narrative itself. The film allows time and memory to figure as an essential part of the fi lm's work. Both the structure and the narrative itself, enact different takes on the question of me mory. It is thus that memory is already implicat- ed in the work. It is this enactment that bring int o play another aspect of memory. Here what is remembered and then played out is that particular m anifestation of abstraction that is linked to negation and autonomy. The complex presence of the disjointed relation of sequences enacts a shattering of the notion of autonomy. Autonomy/immediacy/negation are not themselves subj ect to negation. It is alternatively that they are no longer appropriate to the way in which the film works. The fracture that results in their abeyance is effected by timed space. Timed space be comes the enactment of other abstrac- tions/possibilities. The aesthetic gratuitousness of Memento is that of images swept away by a succession of unwielding neologisms: a retinue of visual replican ts, ceaselessly modified refrains and circuitous re-configurations. Nolan demystifies and challenges noir through an exclamatory, puzzling, and unexpected filmic syntax that explodes into a cacop hony of mixed metaphors that are at once dis- continuous fragmented and fluid. In Memento he re-circulates different possibilities of the det ec- tive genre and we are exposed to a legacy gone aske w. A world of unruly, seemingly haphazzard dissonances, mixing narrative directions, styles, a nd technical protocols distinctly punctuate the
Adrian Gargett, "Nolan's Memento , Memory, and Recognition" page 9 of 9
CLCWeb: Comparative Literature and Culture 4.3 (2002): <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/clcweb/vol4 /iss3/3> film with excessive and translogical "break-outs" o f form. Through a visuality suspended in ambiv- alent quotation, or in elipses of eternal returns a nd departures Memento proposes a kind of acutely conscious, but also incidental nomadism, without gu ide across film form. Perturbed expressly this visuality enunciates a range of enigmatic and ambig uous variations, invoking double-edged, back- and-forth-transformations as an inventive re-animat ion of film form. The dense, often difficult nar- rative lines of Memento 's rhizomatic inter-textualities retain an expressi ve dynamic -- a challenge to the encoded "I" (or eye) of presence. Strange an d unreliable promissory narratives, they are fulfilled inasmuch as their finely tuned signing re mains conflicted and in resistance to systematic categorisation. They are signed from within the par adox of mercurial and indivisible relations, and are liable to an uncertain outline of otherness. Memento is at once indebted to the history of the noir /detective genre and crediting its future inventively. The broken promise of a formalist stru cture and closure is also its rapporchement , a promissory value of otherness to the film form. Agi tating hetero-referentiality in conflict between an inside and an imaginary outside, between specula r immediacy and filmic distance, self- referentiality, and self-reflectivity, between abst ract and a-real, monologue and dialogue, abstract filmic intensities and rhetorical devices, Memento becomes a promissary address that invites dif- fusely its creative impulses to participate in the invigoration of the film form. Works Cited Chandler, Raymond. The Simple Art of Murder . New York: Ballantine 1992. Chandler, Raymond. The Lady in the Lake . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1989. Chandler, Raymond. The Little Sister . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1989. Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema 1: The Movement Image . Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. Minn eap- olis: U of Minnesota P, 1986. Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema 2: The Time Image . Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Robert Galeta. Minneapo lis: U of Min- nesota P, 1989. Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia . Trans. Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1987. Deleuze, Gilles, and C. Parnet. Dialogues . Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. Lond on: Athlone, 1987. Nolan, Christopher, dir. Memento . 113 minutes. Newmarket Films, 2000. Author's Profile: A freelance author and critic, Ad rian Gargett received a Ph.D. in philosophy from th e Universi- ty of Warwick (1997), and M.A. in art history from London's Courtauld Institute (1992). His interests in schol- arship include philosophy, art, film, and cultural theory. Gargett's publications include "The Matrix: What is Bullet Time?," "Doppelganger: Exploded States of Co nsciousness in Fight Club ," and " X-Men : Speed Mutation" at < http://www.disinfo.com >, "Strange Days" in the Journal of Cognitive Liberties 2.3 (2001), "Symmetry of Death" in Variaciones Borges 13 (2002), and "Eternal Feminine" and "Having Sex" in Parallex 25 (2002), and in 2002 he has two books forthcoming, Albert Camus: Absurd Creation (Ashgate) and States of Paranoia (Wall- flower Press). His work in film criticism has also appeared in < http://www.kamera.co.uk >. E-mail: < agargett@darleymead.u-net.com >.
