'Memento' at 25 editor interview
https://www.goldderby.com/film/2026/memento-at-25-dody-dorn-interview-christopher-nolan/

'Memento' at 25 editor interview
Primetime Emmy Awards 2026
Comedy Series
Hacks
80.2%
Comedy Actress
Jean Smart (Hacks)
90.2%
Comedy Actor
Matthew Rhys (Widow's Bay)
85.4%
Comedy Supporting Actress
Hannah Einbinder (Hacks)
64.1%
Comedy Supporting Actor
Harrison Ford (Shrinking)
65.7%
Comedy Directing
Hacks (Hacks)
61.4%
Comedy Writing
Hacks (Hacks)
82.8%
Drama Series
The Pitt
89.9%
Drama Actress
Rhea Seehorn (Pluribus)
77.8%
Drama Actor
Noah Wyle (The Pitt)
94.0%
Drama Supporting Actress
Katherine LaNasa (The Pitt)
77.1%
Drama Supporting Actor
Patrick Ball (The Pitt)
61.7%
Drama Directing
Pluribus (We Is Us)
66.2%
Drama Writing
Pluribus (We Is Us)
74.9%
Limited Series
Beef
60.9%
Movie/Limited Actress
Carey Mulligan (Beef)
59.6%
Movie/Limited Actor
Oscar Isaac (Beef)
74.5%
Movie/Limited Supporting Actress
Linda Cardellini (DTF St. Louis)
70.2%
Movie/Limited Supporting Actor
David Harbour (DTF St. Louis)
65.5%
Movie/Limited Directing
DTF St. Louis
74.2%
Movie/Limited Writing
Beef
68.7%
Competition Program
The Traitors
89.3%
Will Daily Show Win Best Variety Series?
Predict NO
86.6%
Will Jimmy Kimmel Win Best Variety Series?
Predict NO
80.9%
Will John Oliver Win Best Variety Series?
Predict NO
80.2%
Will Stephen Colbert Win Best Variety Series?
Predict YES
92.2%
Will SNL Win Best Variety Series?
Predict NO
87.9%
Read Next:
All 13 Christopher Nolan movies ranked worst to best
Forums
Make Your Picks
Close
Open Menu
Close
Open Search
Make Your Picks
Close Menu
Login
Subscribe to
PMC Logo
Follow Us
Facebook
Instagram
TikTok
YouTube
Alerts & Newsletters
By providing your information, you agree to our
Terms of Use
and our
We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.
PMC Logo
Exclusive
‘Memento’ at 25: How the movie’s Oscar-nominated editor reverse-engineered Christopher Nolan’s classic
Dody Dorn calls
Memento
"in-your-face editing" — and explains why that's a good thing.
Ethan Alter
Plus icon
Ethan Alter
More stories by
‘Ghostbusters’ at 10: Paul Feig on how the 2016 reboot ‘became a political statement’
0 Comments
Read more
New York Film Festival 2026: James Gray’s ‘Paper Tiger’ will be the Opening Night presentation
0 Comments
Read more
‘The Odyssey’ has critics singing Christopher Nolan’s praises: ‘It feels revolutionary’
0 Comments
Read more
April 4, 2026 8:00 am
Guy Pearce in
Memento
Courtesy Everett Collection
Share
Share on Facebook
Post
google
Google Preferred
Pin it
Show more sharing options
Share to Flipboard
Post to Tumblr
Submit to Reddit
Share on LinkedIn
Share on WhatsApp
Email
Print This Page
Now... where were we?
Oh right, we're talking to
Dody Dorn
, the Oscar-nominated editor responsible for assembling
Christopher Nolan
's breakthrough film,
Memento
, in reverse. And you're coming in at the beginning — or is that the end? — of our story celebrating the 25th anniversary of the movie's theatrical release in the spring of 2001.
Premiering at the Venice Film Festival the previous year, the film was turned down by multiple distributors concerned about audiences being able to keep with Nolan's intricately constructed backwards narrative. But Dorn tells Gold Derby that she never had any doubts that
Memento
would stick in moviegoers' memories as a singular experience.
Related Stories
‘The Odyssey’ has critics singing Christopher Nolan’s praises: ‘It feels revolutionary’
Cannes winner ‘All of a Sudden’ sets awards season release date
"I went to see it with friends when it opened, and they all came out of the theater completely thrown — in a positive sense," she remembers now. "That's what fueled all the multiple viewings of the movie; it's like reading a book you love over and over again."
Dody Dorn (center) at a 2024 screening
Charley Gallay/Getty Images for Netflix
As it happens, that notion of rereading a beloved text is at the center of one of Dorn's favorite scenes in the film. Freely adapted from the short story "Memento Mori" — written by Nolan's brother and frequent collaborator
Jonathan Nolan
Memento
pieces together fragments from the odd life of Leonard Shelby (
Guy Pearce
), who introduces himself to everyone he meets for the first, second, and fifth times as a former insurance investigator with a mental condition that erases new memories faster than he can form them. The last thing that he actually remembers is his wife's murder, and he's since dedicated himself to finding her killers.
Midway through
Memento
, there's a flashback to happier times when Leonard spots his still-living wife thumbing through a dog-eared copy of a book she has read multiple times. "He asks her why she's reading it over and over again, and she just replies, 'I enjoy it,'" Dorn notes. "That's a reflection on the movie. And what's interesting is that nobody talked about the fact that it was perceived as being so revolutionary at the time. But now, whenever I meet another editor who has gone to film school in the past 25 years, they've talked to me about how the movie completely changed their ideas about editing."
In this insightful as-told-to anniversary account, Dorn reveals how
Memento
came together, from her first meeting with Nolan to her Oscar night experience.
"You make up your own truth"
Born and raised in the L.A. area, Dorn has filmmaking in her blood — her father built sets for major motion pictures before he moved into film producing. After a brief flirtation with acting, she crewed up in various capacities before pursuing an editing career, first as a sound editor and then as a picture editor, a leap that's not always easy to make. Dorn's early editing credits included the 1997 documentary
Sick
, and
1999's
Guinevere
, but it was a meeting with a novice director named
Christopher Nolan
that really
moved her career forwards by telling a story... backwards
My first memory of
Memento
is not sitting down with Christopher Nolan — it was riding in an elevator in silence with Christopher Nolan. At the end of the ride, he turned to me and said: "You wouldn't happen to be Dody Dorn, would you?" And I replied, "You wouldn't happen to be Christopher Nolan, would you?" After that, we had a fantastic meeting! It's just funny that he chose to introduce himself at the end of the elevator ride. [
Laughs
His wife and producing partner, Emma Thomas, was with us and we started talking and working right away, which is my favorite kind of meeting to have.
He had made
Following
at that point, which I'd seen and plays with narrative structure as well. But reading the
Memento
script was a challenge. There's a history of films that play with structure, and this one was very specific. I knew it was going to be an editing challenge, which I also found very exciting.
I always take notes when I read a script so that I can really dig in and ask questions or reference things in my own mind. During that first meeting, I asked him questions like: "Did you write the script in forward chronology and then chop it up and throw it in the air like a chef?" But he wrote it in that specific structure, and that's part of the movie's strength; it still has a three-act structure even though the chronology is reversed.
The forward-moving sections are in black-and-white and the reverse sections are in color and you transfer between those two periods through Leonard's Polaroid camera, which is black-and-white and then color as the picture is developing. And the fact that it finishes in the middle of the story is brilliant, because it gives the audience the opportunity to feel like they have short-term memory loss, like Leonard. It's very scientific and thought-out in advance.
It's worth remembering that
Memento
was a low-budget feature that was shot in something like 25 days, plus one day of reshoots one roll of film got scratched. In the end, we were able to deal with the scratch and used both days — that footage was from a bathroom scene where Leonard is shaving and posting notes on the mirror. What's funny is that they didn't reshoot the same material; they shot some different stuff, so I was able to add additional material to that great scene.
People always ask this, but the reverse action material in the first scene was actually shot in-camera with the film loaded backwards. It's not an optical effect — the film was actually running through the camera backwards! The only exception was the bullet rolling into place. The film was already loaded to run backwards through the camera, so on set they blew it out of frame and then we had to do a reverse-action to get it to roll into frame.
It's also important to note that we didn't have dailies during shooting, because we didn't have a screening room! So I would go to the set every day at lunch and scan through the the footage with Chris on a DVD on my laptop and got the usual notes that you might get in a screening room when you're watching dailies. We had that time together during production — generally it lasted about a half-hour — and then I saw him again in the editing room when the shoot was over.
"If we can't make memories, we can't heal."
After shooting wrapped, Dorn continued to refine the movie in the editing room with Nolan joining her to talk through specific details, including how long the repetitions of certain scenes would be between the first to second times that we experience them.
As an editor, we almost never get our material in chronological order, so all you care about is the material within the scene. You're discovering each scene as you're putting it together, and that's alway super-fun. I also love material where editing is a character; invisible editing is often described as good editing, but
Memento
is in-your-face editing. And I actually think that's why the film has endured beyond the great performances, great writing and great direction. It's used as a teaching tool in film classes
because
the editing is in your face. It brought the whole concept of editing into a lot of peoples' consciousness.
I had already spent some time imagining how I would put the movie together in a way that was going to be helpful for other people down the line. We were still working with 10-minute reels at that time, so I devised a system where I could alert the sound team when they were seeing a scene for the first time versus the second time, because Chris and I were very meticulous about how we repeated sound and dialogue.
I was cutting the film on an AVID, and put a banner across the top of the frame that would say "First Time" or "Second Time." The first time was usually longer, and then the second time was a brief reprise that might be two or three reels down the road for the other teams. One of those reels might be being worked on by another sound editor and they would have to know to go to the other sound editor and say, "Where's your material for that? I want to duplicate it and put it there." That was the kind of administrative housekeeping that I had to organize.
We did play around with the length of the repeated sections. As I was cutting, I felt we could make the repetitions shorter and shorter; there were times when Chris's point of view and mine were a little different and would come to an agreement or I would just do it his way. It's his movie, and that's my job! [
Laughs
I'll give you an example: The first time that Leonard explains his disease to Burt in the motel lobby, I stayed on Mark Boone Jr.'s face as his expression changed over the recognition of having heard this story before many,
many
times. But Chris wanted to stay on Leonard for as long as possible and show his recognition that he had
told
the story many, many times. I understood why — it was an amazing performance by Guy. But my thinking was that we already spend most of the movie on Guy's face, so I thought this was an interesting beat to spend time on somebody else's face. Ultimately, I edited the scene to be a blend of that, and I like the way it unfolds.
That scene also leads into another beat I really love, which is that moment
Joe Pantoliano
[who plays Leonard's minder and accomplice, Teddy] comes to the motel door and goes, "Lenny!" He did a lot of variations on that line, and I picked the one that was most singular so that when we repeated it, you knew it was the same "Lenny!" It's very particular, and Joe always gave us a lot of that kind of material to work with. There's another moment later on where Joe reaches over and touches Leonard's neck in the cafe and says, "Well, you're still living," and Leonard flinches. I took that out when we were trimming the film down, and my assistant said, "Oh, I liked that moment," so Chris told us to put it back in. It's a nice beat, but it also begged the question: How many nice beats do you keep and how many do you take out without hurting the film?
Guy Pearce and
Carrie-Anne Moss
Another thing that people always wonder — and I'm sure there are Reddit forums about it! — is whether Leonard and Natalie [the femme fatale played by
Carrie-Anne Moss] had sex when he stays over at her house. Speaking to that scene, it was a really important beat that we showed that his pants were on when he woke up next to her, which confirms that they
hadn't
had sex. That was important in our narrative. And then he puts on her shirt and only recognizes that it's her shirt when she says something. We didn't bother showing him take her shirt off and put the other shirt on; it was more about the emotional reaction, not the physical action.
For a film like this, it really paid for Chris to be concise and certain in his concept. It would have been more difficult if he'd had more footage, because we didn't do any preview screenings so there wasn't any material where we could say, "Well maybe Teddy
doesn't
die." Nothing was ever done as caprice in the editing room — every choice served the narrative. And that narrative was that you have a guy that starts as your protagonist and then turns into your villain. How you discover that is through the spooling out of information in reverse.
"I can't remember to forget you."
After distributor after distributor passed on
Memento
the film's now-defunct production company, Newmarket, put it in theaters themselves. It was a risky decision that paid off; made for $9 million, the film grossed $40 million and scored Dody and Nolan their first Oscar nods for Best Film Editing and Best Original Screenplay, respectively.
On Oscar night,
Gosford Park
won the former and
Black Hawk Down
won the latter
Appropriately enough, after her second and final collaboration with Nolan
2002's
Insomnia —
Dorn went on to work with
Black Hawk
director Ridley Scott on three films. Like everyone else, she's interested to see what Nolan's version of
The Odyssey
looks like when it opens in theaters this July, a quarter century after
Memento
put him on the map
I was already working with Chris on
Insomnia
by the time
Memento
opened in theaters, so I wasn't too focused on its release. And I was shocked when I got nominated to tell you the truth. I'm from a blue collar Hollywood tradition, so awards aren't why I do what I do. After I heard about the nomination, I drove around town looking at all the placed I had lived and thinking, "How did I get here?"
A lot of the questions I got about
Memento
at the time and still today are whether it was scripted that way or if it was my idea. And I always say that most movies are edited the way they're scripted, but that does not change the fact that there are constant decisions that an editor is making. We do have some movies out there that are notable for an editor having a huge impact on the structure, but not in this case.
On most films, it's about the craft of the editor putting it together in the best way that they can. And with
Memento
and
Insomnia
, Chris allowed me to work in a creative bubble and the politics were kept out of the room. That's a fantastic privilege for an editor to experience, and it doesn't happen all the time.
Joe Pantoliano and Guy Pearce
Something that's obvious to everybody who watches Chris's films is that he has an obsession with time and how time affects your opinion about what's happening in a movie. You've probably noticed that his logo for his production company, Syncopy, is a little labyrinth puzzle, which is a big thing between him and Emma. She'll make a little labyrinth and pass it to him, and he'll solve it. That's something he really loves and it's exciting to watch how it affects his version of storytelling. And within that, there's always also a lot of emotion.
While we were making
Insomnia
, there was a request to have a version of
Memento
made in forward-chronology that we could include on a DVD. [
The cut was included as a hidden feature
on a limited-edition DVD.]
We digitized the movie onto my AVID and put that version together, but when Chris and I started to watch it, we both said, "This is terrible!" [
Laughs
] The backwards flow was part and parcel of the enjoyment of the film — just telling the straightforward facts of the story was not the point.
This interview has been edited and condensed for length and clarity
Leave a comment
News & Predictions
Get the latest updates on awards and entertainment news
Subscribe
More from Gold Derby
Everything to know
‘The Uprising’ trailer: Andrew Garfield leads a rebellion against King Richard II in Paul Greengrass’ historical epic
0 Comments
Exclusive
‘Ghostbusters’ at 10: Paul Feig on how the 2016 reboot ‘became a political statement’
0 Comments
Festival watch
Toronto International Film Festival 2026: Siân Heder’s ‘Being Heumann’ to open fest, Special Presentations revealed
Festival Watch
New York Film Festival 2026: James Gray’s ‘Paper Tiger’ will be the Opening Night presentation
0 Comments
Awards Watch
Only 9 stars of ‘The Odyssey’ are eligible for the Actor Awards’ top ensemble prize — who’s missing?
0 Comments
The Scorecard
‘Superman’ and ‘The Boys’ lead 6th annual Critics Choice Super Awards nominations
Cancel reply
Most Popular
Emmy Analysis
How Matthew Rhys and Jason Bateman made Emmys history
Emmys Breakdown
Paging Jeff Kober: ‘The Pitt’ and ‘General Hospital’ are sending him to two different Emmys
11 Comments
Big Brother
‘Big Brother 28’ spoilers: First HOH crowned, noms locked in — who’s on the block?
8 Comments
News & Predictions
Get the latest updates on awards and entertainment news
By providing your information, you agree to our
Terms of Use
and our
We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services.
Editor's Picks
Emmy Odds
Instant Emmy predictions: ‘Hacks,’ ‘The Pitt,’ ‘Beef’ are early favorites — but there are some surprises
Emmys Watch
Emmy Awards: 7 tight races we’re already watching
2026 Emmys
Canceled but nominated: How ‘The Late Show,’ ‘Palm Royale,’ ‘Gen V,’ and more landed Emmy nominations after getting the axe
PMC Logo
Most Popular
Randolph Mantooth, Firefighter-Paramedic Johnny Gage on ‘Emergency!,’ Dies at 80
‘Moana’ Cast Guide: Every Live-Action Character vs. the Original Animation
What King Charles 'Made Very Clear' To Prince Harry Before Reunion With Meghan Markle & Kids
Vinod Khosla to Buy Seattle Seahawks for $9.6 Billion
You may also like
Chloe Fineman Leaving ‘Saturday Night Live’ After 7 Seasons, Eyes Netflix’s ‘Myron Bolitar’ Drama Series
Ava DuVernay Returns to Documentaries (and to Netflix) with ’14th’ Amid Trump’s Challenge to Birthright Citizenship
PMC Logo
Our Sites
