hageman.pdf
https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/scope/documents/2008/june-2008/hageman.pdf

The Uncanny Ecology of Mulholland Drive
Andrew Hageman, University of California, Davis, US
This needful, never spent
And nursing element;
My more than meat and drink,
My meal at every wink; (Gerard Manley Hopkins) [1]
I. A Lynchian Ecology that Sticks in the Throat
Imagine a film opening with a steady shot of a craggy mountain landscape white with winter
snow. The camera then pans slowly to the left, and the background becomes indistinct as the
deep focus adjusts to bring the tip of an icicle dangling from a tree branch into sharp relief.
Meanwhile, the sounds of individual water drops colliding with a puddle arise and are
gradually superseded by the pleasant babbling of a snow-melt brook. Cinematic passages like
this are explicitly about the environment, and such representations of nature on film are
becoming an increasingly common method for communicating ecological concerns and
agendas. But the ecological aesthetics of cinema are not limited to depictions of gorgeous
landscapes or frolicking woodland creatures. Nor does expanding the definition of nature on
film to include urban sprawl, factory assembly lines, or toxic waste dumps approach the
limits of how cinema can be ecological. While such a development represents a significant
advance in thinking about cinema and the environment, it is insufficient simply to expand the
list of contents that qualify a film as ecological.
As the field of cinema studies has long demonstrated, analysis of form is fundamental to the
construction of theories on cinematic aesthetics and ideologies, and this holds true for the still
nascent field of cinema and ecology. Just as formal elements like shot composition, editing,
and soundtrack-mixing underwrite ideological constructions of gender and race in film, so
too do these and other formal elements coordinate the ideological representations of nature or
ecology that film can render. In the sequence described above, for example, the shot
composition and camera movements not only display a wild and beautiful scene, but these
formal elements work together to juxtapose sensations of both objectivity and subjectivity.
The steady shot opens the sequence with an objective view of the environment itself, but once
the camera begins to move through this environment we get the impression that a subject is
now inhabiting and surveying this wild place. As such, the spectator is formally manipulated
between objective positions of remove that observe the environment on screen as a distant
place and subjective positions that sensually encounter this place from a point of view within
it.
What arises is a productive tension between aesthetic enjoyment of the environment as an
object separate from us and enjoyment of the ecological systems we inextricably inhabit. Put
another way, cinema form functions at a fundamental level through alternating sensations of
being outside and inside the world projected on the screen, and the tension this evokes is
similar to the tension that limits our capacities to conceptualize ecology and our positions
within it. To think about ecology is to perceive vast systems, but to perceive the outlines of
these systems would require a view from outside of precisely the ecological systems one
inhabits. The aesthetic and ideological matters at work in these formal objective-subjective
tensions and their relationships to content delineate the confluence of cinema and ecology.
But because we are often blind to its formal elements (though they are hidden in plain sight),
cinema seems to offer spectators the experience of seeing without being seen. This is,
however, only an illusion, and one that represses the realities of our positions within
ecologies of production, consumption, and ideology. As such, the confluence of cinema and
ecology is grounded in the structures of repression and its evocative aesthetic product -- the
Uncanny.
There is something deeply ecological about the Uncanny, and something uncanny about
ecology. In his essay, "The Uncanny," Freud points out that the German word for the
Uncanny (unheimlich) articulates the concept in relation to "'heimlich' (homely), 'heimisch'
(native)" (Freud, 1964: 220). Since the Uncanny in German is rooted linguistically in notions
of home and native place, it can be coupled with ecology convincingly, just as Ernst Haeckel
coined the word "oekologie" by synthesizing the Greek terms "oikos" (house or household)
and "logos" (knowledge). Where the idea of an uncanny ecology becomes sophisticated and
critically productive, however, is in Freud's claim that the meaning of heimlich "develops in
the direction of ambivalence, until it finally coincides with its opposite, unheimlich" (Freud,
1964: 226). This dialectic of not-being-at-home within the place one inhabits expresses the
ideological intricacies of how we have thought about humans in nature, or ecology, for
hundreds of years. More specifically, humans have historically questioned whether we are, in
fact, part of nature or excluded from it. To ask this ecological question is to evoke an
uncanny feeling that even if there is a place for us in the natural world, we cannot quite find
our way back to it. And accompanying this feeling of displacement is a longing to be
reinserted into the matrix of Mother Nature, which deeply resembles the uncanny fantasy of
intra-uterine existence and the neurotic's perception of female genitalia as "the former Heim
(home) of all human beings," (Freud, 1964: 245).
What these shared characteristics of ecology and the Uncanny ultimately constitute is the
perception that one inhabits systems that are mysteriously hidden from plain sight. Along
with this perception is a strong impulse to solve these mysteries by comprehending the
structures and connections of these systems. The Uncanny is chiefly a matter of repression
and the return of the repressed as a newly visible sign of something formerly concealed. The
struggle for ecological consciousness, or to become environmentally aware, is the same
project -- to understand the structures and consequences of being interconnected with others
in ecosystems.
To explain how and why the uncanniness of Mulholland Drive (2001) renders an important
ecological aesthetic, it is necessary first to show how more conventional and explicitly
environmentalist cinema seems to repress the Uncanny aspect of ecology. The recent success
of Al Gore's An Inconvenient Truth (2006) demonstrates the medium's powerful potential for
investigating the mysteries of ecology. But Gore's approach, and indeed that of most
explicitly environmentalist cinema, represents ecology as an essentially resolvable mystery.
For example, the blend of syrupy-sweet shots of Gore's hometown river with the computer-
projected presentation suggests that his film closes the case on the mystery of global warming
through science, beauty, and morality. Alternatively, we might think of the cinematic attempt
at rendering ecological consciousness in Godfrey Reggio's Koyaanisqatsi (1982). In this and
other films that strive for a formal objectivism apparently meant to let the world speak for
itself, there is the assertion, often deceptively implicit, that one can convey a comprehensive
picture of the world as biosphere out of balance through clever montage and juxtaposition.
This essay argues, however, that an aesthetic of objectivity misses its own mark. A helicopter
shot of the Amazon basin is really no less bathed in subjective ideology than the shot-reverse
shot convention of a dialogue scene.
What these representative explicitly environmental films reveal is a symptomatic and
essentially ineffective appeal to both the pleasures of natural beauty and the total resolution
of their ecological mysteries. The failure of these films to render a sense of ecology
aesthetically is not a matter of their assembling insufficient images or information. Rather,
their approach to ecology as a resolvable mystery is destined to fail, as it elides the dark and
uncanny aspects of the systems we inhabit. As a more effective way to imagine cinematic
representations of ecology, this essay proposes the David Lynchian aesthetic of rabbit-suited
humans as irreducible mystery figures over the heart-warming affect of fuzzy-bunnies
scampering in the woods. [2]
Lynch creates his idiosyncratic blend of fascination and frustration by making the cinematic
mystery irresolvable. Considered from this angle, Mulholland Drive appears to be an uncanny
ecology of interconnected and irreducible mysteries within mysteries. For example, the
boundaries separating dream and fantasy from reality are perplexingly porous. As scenes
within the unconscious bleed over into consciousness, desires and repression become
interlaced. Further complicating the matter is the production system that opaquely involves
the Castigiliane brothers, Mr. Roque, and the comically inept hitman, as well as the media
consumption systems at work in Club Silencio. The spectator joins the characters in trying to
detect which psychological sphere each scene belongs to, but Lynch repeatedly thwarts the
prospect of solving these mysteries through the same formal moments that arouse the desire
to do so.
The ecology of Mulholland Drive is at its uncanniest in the Breakfast at Winkie's scene.
Formally, the cinematography, or camera work, of this scene renders a very disturbing sense
of place and presence. In contrast to the objectivity of overtly environmental cinema,
Mulholland Drive brings the aesthetic dialectic of subjectivity and objectivity into the
foreground, but as a struggle that cannot be completed. As the camera floats irregularly
during the shot-reverse shot dialogue during the Breakfast at Winkie's scene, the spectator
becomes aware that a set of normally objective shots have become disturbingly subjective.
This transformation is uncanny because we cannot identify the subject position the film is
asking us to inhabit, and it is ecological because it reveals the presence of a place for us
within the structure of the film. Significantly, this takes place in the Breakfast at Winkie's
scene, which is itself one of the most startling and irreducible tears in the narrative fabric of
Mulholland Drive . Moreover, the scene at Winkie's is where the ecological matters in the
film's content, such as poverty, fast food, and questions of animal and waste management
converge. This is the scene that is, to use Lacan's depiction of the objet petit a , "the object
that cannot be swallowed, as it were, which remains stuck in the gullet of the signifier," and
this essay focuses on Breakfast at Winkie's to illustrate the prospects of reading Mulholland
Drive ecologically as well as the prospects for uncanny cinema to reveal the ideological
limits of our ability to think about and represent ecology (Lacan, 1981: 270).
II. "I hope I never see that face ever outside of a dream"
One of the cinematic signatures that makes a David Lynch film recognizable is the obsessive
enjoyment of food and beverages. From the unforgettable scene of the "man-made" chickens
blowing blood bubbles from their giblet-holes in Eraserhead (1977) to the abundance of
cherry pie, donuts, and coffee in Twin Peaks (1990-91), there is a significant pattern of mass-
produced food culture throughout Lynch's oeuvre. In Mulholland Drive , Winkie's is the
signature Lynchian food scene with its restaurant habitat suffused with glistening mass-
produced food, and it is also an extremely uncanny scene in which the boundaries separating
physical reality from the imaginary realities of the unconscious disintegrate. Furthermore,
Breakfast at Winkie's refuses to be swallowed and digested or expelled by the rest of the
film's narrative, not unlike a scene at the heart of Lynch's first memory of the cinema ( Wait
Till the Sun Shines, Nellie , 1953):
There was a scene that struck me very much of a button going down a little
girl's throat. I'm sure that it was very short and that you couldn't see much, but
I still remember the impression I had of this button stuck in the girl's
oesophagus. (Ciment, 1990: 20) [3]
As such, close analysis of this scene and its place within the structure of the film brings into
sharper relief what this essay is calling the uncanny ecology of Mulholland Drive .
When Dan, the plainly terrified dark-haired diner, utters the line "I hope I never see that face
ever outside of a dream" to his acquaintance, Herb, he expresses a desperate desire to
preserve the membrane separating the world of dream and fantasy from the world of his
conscious reality. There is an instructive contradiction in this desire. Rather than desiring a
breach in the membrane that would enable him to face this external fear-object and thus begin
working through his terrible anxiety, Dan's desire never to see that face outside of a dream, if
fulfilled, will actually sustain and intensify his fear. Counter-intuitively, though, Dan has
come to Winkie's, where the membrane is most likely to be breached, to discuss his dream
and the desire to hold its content at bay. What we see in this contradictory desire, therefore, is
the paradox of Lacan's assertion that, "it is in relation to the real that the level of phantasy
functions. The real supports the fantasy, the phantasy protects the real" (Lacan, 1981: 41).
Within this recto-verso structure linked by a membrane, the place of dreams, according to
Lacan, cannot be cordoned off from the real. This mutual imbrication of fantasy and the real
is a critical element of Breakfast at Winkie's, and its intricate construction begins with the
narrative frame that opens into the Winkie's vignette.
The transition into Breakfast at Winkie's occurs when we see Rita falling asleep after
successfully slipping into Aunt Ruth's apartment to find refuge from her amnesic post-
accident wandering. Initially, this restaurant vignette seems coded by its juxtaposition with
Rita falling asleep as a dream sequence. As she falls asleep, however, Rita lies completely
motionless. The conventional cue for a dream sequence often incorporates the bodily shifting,
fluttering eyelids, or accelerated breathing, which signal the unrest within rest that
accompanies dreams, but none of these appear here. What's more, the cut between her
sleeping and the next visual image -- the white, yellow, and blue "Winkie's Sunset Blvd" sign
-- is a straight cut with no visual effect to suggest a shift in modes of consciousness. There
are only two subtle connections potentially bridging Winkie's to Rita's psychic world. One is
the wail of a police siren while the camera lingers on the restaurant sign -- police sirens were
a potent ambient component of Rita's post-accident wandering into the city. The second is the
Winkie's Sunset Blvd sign -- a Sunset Blvd street sign was among the few objects focalized
(though it remains uncertain whether or not by Rita) as she passed through Los Angeles
toward Aunt Ruth's apartment. Both of these scenic elements, however, are so vaguely coded
that it is more useful to regard them as ambiguous coincidences rather than evidence that
Breakfast at Winkie's is located either inside or outside of Rita's unconscious activity.
From this indeterminate entrée, the film proceeds to the focalization of two men, Dan and
Herb, seated in a Winkie's booth just beginning a conversation:
Dan: "I just wanted to come here."
Herb: "To Winkie's?"
Dan: "This Winkie's."
Herb: "Okay, why this Winkie's?"
This conversation further suggests that multiple layers of simulation are unfolding on the
screen before us. Along with the shot of the restaurant sign, this dialogic repetition
establishes the setting as Winkie's, but the absurdity of the name along with details of the
mise-en-scène , such as the Denny's-replica name tags, inform us that Winkie's is in fact a
pastiche-doppelgänger of fast-food kitsch. [4]In addition to the intratextual play initiated
through the sign and name tags, Lynch has, in an interview with Chris Rodley, explicitly
connected Winkie's with a Los Angeles Denny's at Gower and Sunset, which he claims had
"a satanic booth in the parking lot" (Rodley, 2002: 277). Moreover, a description on the
Pittsburgh radio-station WQED website adds the prospect of a Lynchian nod to the fast food
of his Pennsylvania years as one more surface of the Winkie's pastiche:
Long before "golden arches" graced every community in the country, one
Pittsburgh fast food chain was well-known and heartily patronized. In fact, the
chain's slogan – "Winky's makes you happy to be hungry" - captured the spirit
of the restaurant whose spotlight sandwich was called "The Big Wink."
(WQED.org, 2000)
Thus, Winkie's is a pastiche place whose name literally winks at us, the spectators, including
us as co-conspirators in this masquerade. Indeed, fiction film settings are always already
simulations: a place posing as another place. Yet, in a film fraught with doppelgängers, the
restaurant's overtly referential posing is significant. By exposing rather than concealing its
status as a constructed place, Winkie's seems uncannily to leap off the screen and breach the
membrane between the spectator and the projected fantasy world(s) of the fiction film. In this
way, Lynch's scenery ceases to perform the passive role of mere backdrop; as a result, the
screen does not facilitate an escape from the world outside the cinema into an enjoyably
aesthetic elsewhere. On the contrary, the usually passive background against which people
live has become not only visible, but palpably and disturbingly present. This inversion is a
powerful component of the uncanny ecology Lynch creates.
Following the opening lines quoted above, the diners' conversation continue with Dan saying
that he has dreamt twice about "this Winkie's." Herb’s face remains inscrutable as Dan
continues:
It's not day or night; it's kinda half-night, you know, but it looks just like this,
except for the light…There's a man, in back of this place; he's the one who's
doing it. I can see him through the wall. I can see his face. I hope that I never
see that face ever outside of a dream.
To this, Herb replies, "So, you came here to see if he's out there," which prompts one last line
from Dan, "To get rid of this god-awful feeling." Forehead-vein bulging in horror, Dan
underscores the depth of his desire to keep his real and dream/fantasy worlds separate.
Despite this verbally-espoused desire, however, here he is, seated at Winkie's, talking with
this man whom he must know will decode the reason for their meeting at this Winkie's and
compel him to look -- "So you came here to see if he's out there." This begs the question, in
reference to the Lacanian paradox of fantasy and the real as interconnected: is Dan's "god-
awful feeling" a genuine fear of the collapse of the membrane that has so far kept the dream-
world at bay, or is he actually afraid of its preservation? To answer this, we must consider the
men's foray behind the restaurant.
Now, because the bum is the material catalyst who triggers the collapse of the dream world
into the real and the parallel collapse of Dan's body, the answer to whether Dan may have
come to Winkie's to break through the dream-real membrane and see him resides within the
bum inhabiting the alley behind Winkie's. Dan's statement, "He's the one who's doing it,"
suggests that the bum possesses agency with potentially supernatural potency. Yet, both the
film credits and Lynch interviews refer to this figure only as a "bum," thus rendering him a
figure of the diegetic real and not a metaphysical monster. To understand the bum as a human
being is crucial to a psychoanalytical reading of the vignette. As a real diegetic figure, the
bum can be linked materially to a key focalized image in Winkie's. When Dan rises from the
table to join Herb and venture into the alley, the camera lingers at the booth to pan down over
the table, showing an empty plate and glass on Herb's side, while Dan has apparently not
even touched his bacon, eggs, hash browns, orange juice or coffee. Up to this point, the scene
has consisted of a strict economy of shots, though mediated through the uncanny floating
camera described above, showing only the men's faces in tight close-up and the cash-register
area when it is mentioned during Dan's dream narration. Within this context, the focalized
food represents a strange and important irruption into this economy. It signals the imminent
approach of an acute materialization of the amorphous subjective-objective confusion that
has hovered like a specter around the scene via the floating camera, thereby notifying the
spectator that she is about to be pulled into this cinematic environment in a strange and likely
revealing way.
An untouched breakfast would conventionally suggest fear manifesting in a loss of appetite.
But, just as the enigmatic lingering focalization protrudes -- like a phallic "Winkie" -- from
the fabric of the shot economy, so too does it refuse to be contained by this symbolic reading.
What happened in Dan's dreams is now happening in reality, and since the scene is becoming
a terrifying self-fulfilling prophesy, this protrusion cannot be dismissed as a sign exclusively
within reality. The presence of the bum is a self-fulfilling prophesy connected to a place like
Winkie's, where food is kitsch -- mass-produced junk to fit the fantasy aesthetic of an all-
American breakfast -- and the leftovers of which, whether the dross of food-factory
production or that which diners leave unconsumed, is discharged as waste into dumpsters
behind the restaurant. In this un-Disneylike "circle of life," the bum feeds on the waste of this
institution -- on the waste people don't feel like eating, and because we are what we eat, the
bum eating waste is also the waste, or shit, of the society supporting the fast-food institution.
That "god-awful feeling" about the man behind Winkie's as the one who's doing it translates
into a collision between Dan's dream/fantasy outside and the reality of the bum. [5]
As a patron of Winkie's, Dan's participation in fast-food production and consumption self-
perpetuates the presence of the bum. The one who's doing it turns out to be Dan. He is a
complicit contributor to a distancing of others from the self not through the fantasy of the
dream-world but through the act of mistaking fantasy for the real. Meeting the bum face to
face is an instance of the strangeness in Lacan's statement, "The world is all-seeing, but it is
not exhibitionistic -- it does not provoke our gaze. When it begins to provoke it, the feeling of
strangeness begins too" (Lacan, 1981: 75). In seeing the bum, Dan begins to perceive the all-
seeing world; his position as subject-who-sees is exchanged for a position of object-that-is-
seen. He can now see himself as an object positioned within a structure where every greasy
meal of comfort food at Winkie's is already the stuff of American food aesthetics leftover
from the Great Depression. Furthermore, he can also see through the fantasy that sustains
such fast-food institutions by avoiding the ecological repercussions within the all-seeing
world -- the waste of packaging and the social impacts of low-wage labor all condense here in
the figure of the bum.
Thus, the provocation of the bum's presence is a return of the repressed that in this case
proves fatal. To see oneself as seen by the world which bears the brunt of processes that
converge in a Winkie's breakfast is to exfoliate too many layers of the fantasy that has
enabled a lifetime of eating this way. This vision confronts us with the uncanny realization
that we have always been within the environment from which we have believed ourselves
separate. Such a shock is simply unsustainable for Dan, as perhaps it must also be for the
spectator.
III. "I mean it like it is, like it sounds" [6]
The soundtrack complements this uncanny encounter with the bum as a return of the
repressed. As Dan and Herb pass the side of the restaurant, an ambient buzzing arises at the
edge of an engineered silence bereft of any diegetic sounds. The auditory near-emptiness
signifies Dan's repression that has heretofore been so thoroughly convincing for him, while
also conjuring an unsettling sensation for the spectator who is being fed visual cues
suggesting that there definitely is "a man in the back of this place." As the pair approaches
the dumpster area, a dampened sound of motion intrudes on the otherwise blank audio
vacuum. Although this sound is too fuzzy for us to identify, it does resemble the auditory
sensation of moving through water -- an environment once familiar to a human body but left
behind at birth, and therefore a sound connected to the repression of one environment when
another displaces it. In light of Freud's relation of the uncanny with birth and "the
phantasy…of intra-uterine existence" as a significant instance of repressed atmospheric
transition, it becomes striking that the most difficult scene to account for in a film about
female protagonists focuses exclusively on two men fearfully obsessed with their Winkie's
(Freud, 1964: 244-5). Further complicating this uncanny sex trajectory is the fact that the
"man" in back of this place is in fact played by a woman (Bonnie Aarons)—a discovery
which, through its radical destabilization of film and gender binaries, bolsters the myriad
anxieties that saturate the film. [7]
It is amidst this ambience of atmospheric and psychological transition that the anticipated
moment arrives when the bum, in a fluid motion, as if a camera fixed on a dolly, appears
from behind the graffiti-inscribed wall. Coinciding with the visual appearance of the bum is
an abrupt yet muted sound followed by a visual cut to the image of Dan now collapsing
backwards into Herb's arms. The buzz that precedes this abrupt audio-intrusion is
synonymous with the myriad scenes in Lynch (think of the ambient drone throughout
Eraserhead or the hyper-emphasized hum and sputter of fluorescent lights in the Twin Peaks
hospital and morgue scenes) which use continuous auditory signals to paint the diegetic
world as one in which things relentlessly are not right. It is the sound of a chronic
uncanniness always on the verge of demanding recognition -- the sound of the repressed
inevitability of death that one cannot face and survive. Then, within this audio-signifying
structure, the startlingly abrupt sound represents an acute moment when the real bursts into
the world of fantasy and dream. An aporia is opened by such acute moments in which
characters are able to see themselves as contained by their milieu -- ecologically aware of the
systems they inhabit.
Correspondent to the appearance of the bum, the soundtrack underscores this moment in
which layers of fantasy are exfoliated to reveal how thoroughly one always is embedded
within ecology despite the ease with which we can usually ignore the chronic and subtle
drone of its structural presence. As spectators, we receive the benefit of observing this
impossible yet imperative revelation through Dan, and the ecocritical import of this is that we
do not need to (perhaps cannot) repeat Dan's moment of multi-mediated awareness-to-death
in order to perceive the multitude of our own layers of fantasizing that we live in safe
separation from the environment. Through this insight, we might better be able to diagnose
our previous blind-spots and begin a gradual process of gentle exfoliation in order to get a
closer, if more terrifying, view of our position within the ecological structures we inhabit.
Between the introduction of the abrupt sound that terminates the buzz and the visual cut, the
interrupting sound hovers briefly as a dis-embodied or dis-originated sound from off-screen
that creates a dissonance and suspense that draws in the spectator as detective to place the
sound and reestablish order. While Lynch's visual cut to Dan collapsing seems at first glance
to match the sound to a material body of origin, it is indefinite whether this audible response
to a moment of terror was a verbal scream of surprise, the inarticulate sound of a terrified
gasp, or perhaps the internal sound of the fear-induced physiological shutdown -- the literal
and over-amplified sound of Dan's heart stopping. To maintain the reading of Lynch's use of
ambient sound as a perpetual audio signification of the repression of a world where things are
not right, however, is to dismiss the conventional bodily re-containments of this intruding
sound. Instead, the abrupt audio intrusion is the sound of Dan's sudden perception of the real
poking through the membrane that has kept it apart from his dream/fantasy world.
To explain this in more detail, this position modifies Slavoj Žižek's analysis of Lynch's The
Elephant Man (1980). In Looking Awry ,Žižek describes a similar sound engineering moment
of what he deems "psychic reality" as "a pulse that does not imitate or symbolize anything,
but that 'seizes' us immediately, 'renders' immediately the thing -- what thing? ... the beat of
that grey and formless mist, pulsing slowly as if with inchoate life" ( Žižek, 1992: 41). To
applyŽižek's argument to Mulholland Drive , however, this essay identifies the perpetual and
uncanny ambient sound as the location of "the inchoate mist," with the abrupt sound that
intrudes as the aural termination of the pulse sustaining Dan's psychic reality. As the sound
coincides precisely with the bum's appearance, it is logical to associate it with the psychic
termination precipitated by the irruption of the real -- the termination which ultimately
precipitates a physiological termination too. From this analytical perspective, the audio
interruption is the sound of the acute moment, not of the breach itself, but when the
cognizance of the breach has finally arisen, and it operates as the "black humor" of Deleuze
and Guattari that "does not attempt to resolve contradictions, but to make it so that there are
none, and never were any" (Deleuze and Guattari, 1983: 11). This is the audio equivalent of
the moment Dan can no longer perceive himself as a subject who can hear the chronic buzz
but ignore it as coming from elsewhere. Since he can no longer keep the repercussions of his
being in the world at bay, Dan now acutely perceives himself as an object that helps create
and sustain this chronic buzz.
Therefore, the soundtrack spanning Breakfast at Winkie's reiterates the visual narrative
suggestions that Los Angeles can shift suddenly, through the fracturing of one's psychic
reality, from the heaven of Betty's Hollywood "dream-place" to a hellish cesspool filled in
part with one's own shit. And when the sound and image converge behind Winkie's, the
phallus of the dream that erects, sustains, and finds sustenance (though of a saccharine sort)
in fast-food dysfunctions, deflates. Dan, once a throbbing, veiny phallus, self-destructs, like
an American too full of saturated fat and sodium, into a flaccid waste-state when he
encounters the proverbial perineum not as an impermeable border but as a connective tissue
that leaves the phallus and the anus -- the place of shit -- in a proximity all too close for his
taste.
When the film transitions from Winkie's back to the Betty-and-Rita narrative, it does so
through an uncanny repetition as the camera's gaze returns twice to the edge of the graffiti-
covered wall but without a reappearance of the bum. The film then cuts to Rita sleeping in the
same position before the Winkie's interlude. As a reflection of the frame opening onto
Winkie's, the exit also implies that this vignette is the stuff of (Rita's) dreams. But the camera
shows Rita only very briefly, and, as in the entrée, her motionlessness resists the cinematic
dream coding. The film cuts from Rita's still body to an extreme close-up of Mr. Roque's
mustachioed mouth as he places a phone call: "The girl is still missing," which, in turn,
initiates a series of subsequent calls to disseminate his message. To swallow the red herring
of Rita's appearances framing the vignette falsely as her dream is potentially to miss or
dismiss the connection of Dan's phrase, "he's the one who's doing it," with Mr. Roque as one
man who is indeed doing something. Martha Nochimson's analysis of this connection is to a
certain extent sound when she suggests, "mortality issues from Mr. Roque's office… With
Mr. Roque in control, the hopes with which Betty and Adam enter the film are already
dashed, even though they do not yet know it" (Nochimson, 2005: 170). Yet, emphasis should
be redirected away from the idea of an assumed external agency and toward the link
connecting the bum with Mr. Roque as an index of how to read Breakfast at Winkie's as an
explanatory yet irreducible kernel of Mulholland Drive and its uncanny ecology.
Roque's executive decisions foreclose Betty's prospects before Adam Kesher and his film are
even known to her, but it is important to note that his decision is not calculated malevolence.
Because Roque is part of the Hollywood system Betty has eagerly yet naively entered, her
demise cannot fully be blamed on him. Like Dan at Winkie's, Betty is a complicit actor who
embraces the very structure that destroys her. In the cases of both Betty and Dan, the
narrative gestures at turns towards systemic evils and the mythological American ideal of
personal responsibility when one lives in poverty. Lynch refrains, however, from condemning
either the systems at work or the individuals as the sources of human eviscerations. Rather,
Mulholland Drive offers an incomplete structure of fragmentary and often contradictory
gestures which posit only partial ideological statements. In its allusion to, yet elision of, a
Manichean dichotomy of good and evil, the film refuses the idea of an impenetrable
membrane capable of distancing good from evil, or in this case, of separating awareness of
the fragility of the ecological structure one inhabits from participation in destroying this
system and thus oneself. As such, Mulholland Drive reveals not only the deep connection
between fantasies, desires, and resultant miseries, but also the radical impossibility of
confronting these connections.
IV. Black (Coffee) and Blue (Hair)
What prevents the ecological suggestiveness of Breakfast at Winkie's from coagulating into a
mere anti-fast food diatribe is the way this scene permeates the structure of the entire film.
The integral role the scene plays within Mulholland Drive is made apparent by the repeated
appearances of coffee and symbolic transfers involving the bum, Rita, and the blue-haired
woman seated in the box at Club Silencio. Each of these symbolic threads systematically
illuminates the film from within; yet these illuminations are uncanny in that they
simultaneously demonstrate the fundamental futility of their abilities to construct consistent
positions on the ecological matters raised within the film. While the self-contained ecology of
Breakfast at Winkie's does evince an ecological message, when examined within the total
fabric of the film, even this brilliantly rendered ecological message falls victim to the human
proclivity to conceptualize the environment as elsewhere. We are left at the end of
Mulholland Drive firmly re-embedded within the inside/outside structure the film had seemed
so effectively to destabilize. That said, however, by embracing the distinct inability to follow
through with a consistent ecological-ideological position, Lynch is neither failing nor
endorsing an ecological laziness. Rather, Mulholland Drive offers a radical cinematic form of
representing ecology that recognizes the real of ecology as meaninglessness -- as a structure
beyond comprehension and not to be confused with the supposed meanings of its individual
constituent elements. The best way to explain this paradoxical assertion is by analytically
tracing the coffee repetition and the bum-Rita-blue-haired lady interchanges.
Coffee was historically a luxury good that became an American staple. This symbolic
beverage spans all the scenes set at Winkie's, and it brims over into other crucial spaces in the
film. Considering the potency of coffee throughout the Twin Peaks series and film as object
of obsessive consumption and as dream code for Agent Cooper in the Red Room, positive
cinematic precedent distinguishes it as an important "thing" in Lynchian cinema. In fact,
Lynch has now launched his own David Lynch Signature Cup coffee beans, with the Inland
Empire (2006) tie-in motto: "It's all about the beans, and I'm just full of beans." [8]The
presence of coffee throughout Mulholland Drive repeats this trend, and, as in Twin Peaks , it
hints at the existence of a code but also prevents the spectator from cracking it.
The first significant appearance of coffee in Mulholland Drive occurs just before the
Castigiliane brothers arrive at the meeting. We are informed that the producers have arranged
to serve one of the finest espressos in the world. In an act both sumptuous and disgusting,
Luigi Castigiliane takes an elegant sip from the demitasse and proceeds to spit the deep black
liquid into a white linen napkin. Doubtless, this espresso was made from excellent beans and
pulled by a professional barista, yet Castigiliane rejects it, and he does so as an act. Due to
the espresso's superiority, this rejection is surely a didactic performance rather than a genuine
sensual response. Martha Nochimson reads the rejection as symbolizing the Castigiliane
brothers' association with the dark side of a Hollywood film business run by thugs concerned
only with power, to the detriment of creativity. [9]To the extent that creativity intersects with
aesthetics as taste -- the knowledge of what to spit out, Nochimson is correct. Yet, this essay
interprets the act as a perversion of taste. Like the bum behind Winkie's, the appearance of
this spitting evokes an ecology of power/class structure and wanton waste. Contrary to the
notion of class possessing taste, Luigi's dramatic spit reconfigures class as possessing no need
for taste. And since Winkie's is located on Sunset Boulevard within a film rife with allusions
to Billy Wilder's Sunset Boulevard (1950) --a perennial Lynch favorite and a classic
narrative of fatal trauma stemming from failure and class immobility in Hollywood -- the idea
of the coffee thread perpetuating a class-concerned ecology is distinctly plausible. [10]
Coffee next appears immediately after Betty/Diane's ex-girlfriend, having recently moved
out, collects the last of her things. [11] Betty/Diane uses a cheap, plastic coffee-machine to
brew a pot of the inexpensive ground coffee sold in large tins. Compared with the
Castigiliane brother, she is marked as lower-class by her coffee, but she, too, practices a
perversion of taste in consuming a mass-produced good that tastes anything but good. Like
the caffeine powder sold by General Foods International as a supernatural doorway to
Vienna, this cup of mass-produced coffee whisks Betty/Diane away from her depressing
reality and into a fantasy sex scene; yet, just as the coffee turns into whiskey when she steps
over the sofa, so, too, does the sex scene fail to reach climax. Thereby, coffee assists in
making this scene repeat the Winkie's eating-defecating message that society in LA is
structured so it cannot produce dreams without also producing disturbing refuse in the poorer
echelons.
The penultimate cup of coffee in the film solidifies the alignment of Betty/Diane with Dan at
Winkie's. She drinks this cup during the agonizing moment of the party before Adam Kesher
and Rita/Camilla's attempt, though uncompleted, to announce their engagement. The visual
sequencing of this scene transitions from a distraught expression on Betty/Diane's face when
Adam, off-screen, finishes his story with the phrase, "Sometimes good things happen," to a
tight close-up of the demitasse cup with steam rising from the espresso, and then to the
Castigiliane brother of perverted taste. Thus a visual collection of signifiers from multiple
scenes converge within this penultimate moment of coffee consumption. This tempest-in-a-
demitasse appears to be the catalyst for Betty/Diane's realization that she can no longer
sustain the fantasy that either her love relationship or acting career remains intact. Her
fantasy dissipates in the face of the Hollywood real, where money, class, and power
contemptuously supplant taste, and Betty's paradoxical expression of repugnant distaste when
she is tasting this exquisite espresso embodies the dark bitterness of awakening to the reality
of her "dream-place" in collapse: a bitterness so dark, in fact, that once away from the party,
Betty/Diane proceeds, over coffee at Winkie's, to contract a hit-man to kill Rita/Camilla
before committing suicide at home.
Had the narrative curtain dropped immediately after Betty/Diane committed suicide,
Breakfast at Winkie's -- as a symptomatic coffee thread -- would contribute to a tidy
conclusion that posits a consistent, coherent ecological reading of the film as an allegory of
unsustainable food and entertainment production and consumption in conjunction with a
philosophy of being with others. The film would have closed the circle of ambiguity initiated
by the film-opening shots of an unidentified person collapsing onto a bed by strongly
suggesting it was Betty/Diane. Such a conclusion would fit tidily with Lynch's dedicating the
film to Jennifer Syme. She was Lynch's assistant through Lost Highway (1997), and she died
in a car accident that, although not officially ruled a suicide, certainly could appear to be. [12]
But the fact is, the film continues after the gunshot for a ninety-second coda that refuses to be
subsumed as the impressions being screened by Betty/Diane's dying consciousness.
While dialectically maintaining the pattern of symptoms divulged by the coffee thread, we
must transcend the comfort of the would-be ecological message to read the coda, and this
means to examine the interconnectedness of the bum, Rita, and the blue-haired woman.
Recall, as mentioned above, that when the bum behind Winkie's becomes visible to Dan, he
does so in a fluid lateral motion, as if fixed on a dolly. Within a film concerned with film-
making, the bum is performing the role of a camera. Like a rolling camera (in the double
sense of rolling), the bum's gaze reminds Dan as well as the spectator who is also startled by
the bum's appearance, that we do not merely gaze at the world around us, but we are also
always posing for documentation. Like Lacan's discarded sardine tin, the bum is a discarded
thing that looks back, both at the diegetic characters who have hitherto been blind to his/her
existence and, especially through the tightly framed close-up of the bum's face, at the
spectator. [13] As a camera looking back, the bum reiterates his uncanny presence as
something which occurs naturally in the world of cinema as well as that of fast food.
But the fluidity of the bum's appearance also transports him through cinematic space beyond
the confines of the dumpster behind Winkie's. After Betty and Rita have discovered Diane
Selwyn's rotting corpse, they return to Aunt Ruth's apartment to disguise Rita since the
corpse, an uncanny double as harbinger of death, implies that she is in grave danger. After a
lingering focalization of cosmetics and hair-styling goods -- a kitsch doppelgänger of the
food at Winkie's -- the camera slides laterally behind Betty to look into the mirror as Betty
slides Rita on a rolling chair into position to see herself in the mirror. The fluid motion of
Rita's appearance enacts a subtle yet extremely uncanny repetition of the bum's entrance.
Sitting mannequin-still and donning a hyper-blonde wig, Rita seems to be taking on a
symbolism passed along from the bum.
The symbolism exchanged is the role of a figure at the juncture of fantasy and reality. Faced
with an imminent death bred within whatever underworld aspect of the Hollywood ecology
Rita has formerly inhabited, she is attempting an escape by becoming someone else. Yet,
Rita's rolling is an imperfect and complicated repetition of the bum's. While the bum was
animated, though equally fake in terms of hyperbolical filth, Rita's artificiality is
communicated through the inanimate mannequin posture she affects as she is rolled by
an/other -- by Betty. Moreover, the imperfect repetition manifests as a reflection. Rita and
Betty are entwined within a system of looking at each other, themselves, and themselves as
the other. Instead of the direct gazing back of the bum, this repetition conjures an inescapable
series of gazing handoffs and returns among people multiplied over and again by the mirror-
camera composite. What began behind Winkie's as the return of the repressed by-product of
food kitsch and a culture waste has metamorphosed into an incomprehensible ecology of
unstable subject-object and self-other constructions.
Bolstering this idea that the bum's appearance functions within a film-wide network of
symbolic exchanges, is the way he initiates the self-other relationship as one with an other
who is shit. To perceive the bum as refuse is especially appropriate in light of Lacan's
excrement-based definition of human civilization: "The characteristic of a human being is
that -- and this is very much in contrast with other animals -- he doesn't know what to do with
his shit. He is encumbered by his shit… Civilization mean shit, cloaca maxima " (Turkle,
1978: 238). Within this Lacanian notion is an ecological critique of inhabiting a world with
others, including one's own feces. And the significance of this idea is illuminated by the way
Mulholland Drive , unlike most Lynch films, shows a world devoid of animal inhabitants with
the few oblique exceptions of the cow skull adorning the cowboy's corral gate and the
supremely phallic fast-food appearance of animals as meat at Pink's Hotdog stand. [14]
Although visually repressed in this film, animals do inhabit Lynch's rendition of Los Angeles,
as evinced by the presence of their feces.
When Coco leads Betty to Aunt Ruth's apartment for the first time, their progress is
interrupted by the presence of dog droppings on the courtyard pavement. Visibly agitated,
Coco warns the unseen, yet presumably at home, owner of the culprit: "Wilkins, if that damn
dog craps in the courtyard one more time, I'm just gonna bake his little butt for breakfast,"
after which she tells Betty that pets are allowed but not allowed to defecate here in the shared
public space "for obvious reasons." Coco's dialogue reinforces the idea that LA is a place
where a fantasy pretense must be maintained when it comes to the realities of being with
others. If people are allowed to keep pets, feces will necessarily be produced, but just as the
animals are kept from sight throughout the film, so, too, must their feces remain repressed
from view. Note also how Coco frames this policy in terms of "obvious reasons,"
underscoring a natural at-homeness of the need to repress all physical traces of waste.
Significantly, Coco tells one more tale of on-site animal messes in this scene: "You know,
there was a man that lived here once that had a prize-fighting kangaroo; well, you just
wouldn't believe what that kangaroo did to this courtyard." Whereas the spectator was
initially apt to follow Coco's "obvious reasons," even as it points to social repression, the
concept of the domestic prize-fighting kangaroo sends this conversation on being with
animals into a realm of absurdity. Surely there would be even more compellingly "obvious
reasons" not to domesticate kangaroos, not to train them to fight, and not to keep them in an
LA apartment complex, yet that kangaroo was there, and its messes were, unsurprisingly, the
stuff of legend.
To connect the analysis of Coco's dialogue with Breakfast at Winkie's, the filthy, shit-like
appearance of the bum, including the turd-like dreadlocks, as the refuse of a society that
institutionalizes fast-food, parallels the curls of dog-doo staining the courtyard. Furthermore,
in warning Wilkins to repress his dog's shit, Coco refers explicitly to breakfast. Within a film
so meticulously wrought to induce intuitive associations among scenes, this verbal allusion to
breakfast is a suggestive link between the bum behind Winkie's and the brown trace of the
repressed deposited by Wilkins's "damn dog."
This complex network of symbolic transfer concludes with the woman in the blue wig, first
seen sitting in the balcony box-seat at Club Silencio. Although she remains fixed in her seat,
the artificiality evoked through her mannequin-stiff posture and noticeably fake wig
replicates Rita's artificiality, and thus Rita's repetition of the bum. The blue-haired woman's
initial appearance at Club Silencio coincides suggestively with Betty and Rita's convulsions
during the show that physically forecast the dissolution of the fantasy they've created with
Rita's wig. Likewise, the blue-haired woman's initial appearance also coincides with the
initial appearance of the enigmatic blue box which we see later in the bum's possession, as he
revolves it in his hands with disinterest before dropping it, as if a piece of shit, into a brown
paper bag rather than fetishize it as a source of supernatural power. And it is the blue-haired
woman and the bum who reappear within the film's coda; in fact, the blue-haired woman gets
the very last word of Mulholland Drive .
Because she does get the last word and comprises the last image before the screen goes black,
analysis of what the blue-haired woman signifies as she concludes the exchange is
imperative. To begin with, her position within the environment of the theatre is suggestive.
Balcony box seats traditionally signify the place of high class and good taste. Yet, the coffee
thread has already demonstrated how the film's structure recurrently controverts the parity of
class and taste. Couple this structural trend with the absurdly synthetic appearance cultivated
by the blue-haired woman (an appearance that carries the trace of transvestitism and thus the
bum's gender confusion), and her concluding appearance seems to fortify the film's
perversion of taste. Still, the blue-haired woman differs from Luigi Castigiliane in that she is
not the figure of a ruthless power-monger. Rather, she represents a paradox by inhabiting the
place (the physical location) of taste, yet donning within this place an appearance that
undercuts the taste implied by her precise location in this theatrical ecology. And this paradox
suggests that the blue-haired woman attends and enjoys the performance at Club Silencio
without conventional reasons of aesthetics, class, power, or taste. The figure with the
synthetic blue hair becomes the sublation (in the Hegelian aufhebung sense) of the
Manichean dichotomy of good and evil embodied in the obsessively-noted but feebly-
interpreted blonde-brunette dialectic of Lynch's cinema.
As a figure of paradoxical self-representation expressing neither outright veneration nor
contempt for class and taste, the blue-haired woman is the single character in the film capable
of perceiving simulated fantasy and the real as well as high art and shit -- of consuming them
with the same aesthetic enjoyment. She is the figure of an aesthetic consciousness that is
comfortable inhabiting a world of waste and beauty because it perceives the underlying
sameness that defies discrimination. Because the blue-haired woman also acts as a
spectatorial doppelgänger (only she and the spectator remain), her last word, "Silencio,"
names this aesthetic, both for her and for the spectator. "Silencio" prescribes a silencing of
the self that can enable a redirection of attention to what has heretofore been silenced --
repressed. Only by tempering the subjectivity of the self, can one begin to diagnose the
fantasies of the present moment in all of their nauseating detail. This aesthetic practice of
silence is a hesitation that allows the uncanny ecologies of Winkie's and the world to stick in
the throat, since their irreducible mysteries cannot be rejected outright or safely subsumed by
any coherent system of ideological digestion.
V. The Ecological Dessert of the Real
The ninety-second coda that follows Betty/Diane's suicide is a cinematic space that persists
after the curtain has dropped on her living consciousness, and this persistent space is the very
theatre where the illusion of illusion is continually unmasked -- where the Club Silencio
audience as well as the Mulholland Drive spectators are repeatedly reminded of the
magician's dialogue, that "This is all an illusion… This is all a recording." All that remains in
this space, after Betty/Diane is dead and the stage show is over, is not a behind-the-curtain
interpretation of the film's meaning, but, rather, the hesitant inhabitation of the blue-haired
woman's uncanny position of enjoyment without reason -- jouissance . And it is only from this
position of enjoyment without reason within the structure of the film that one can see that
behind the curtain of ecological gestures posited within and emanating outward from
Breakfast at Winkie's there is nothing. Only in this blue-haired position of jouissance can we
recognize the meaninglessness of ecology -- an ecology that remains inaccessible to us not
due to human distance from it but from the fantasy that a distance exists which effectively
screens the schismless real of non-distance.
This uncanny message begins in Breakfast at Winkie's, with Dan illustrating the immanent
fatality of refusing to recognize the undesirable elements of the world as inextricably
imbricated with the self, and this is the same refusal that strikes down Betty/Diane just before
the coda. As such, Mulholland Drive gestures repeatedly at critical questions of ecology
through fast-food kitsch, waste, class structure, and the presences of the bum as well as
animals and their droppings, but without arranging these gestures into a complete ecological
ideology. While each segment of this essay analyzes a different aspect of the uncanny
ecology of Mulholland Drive , together they demonstrate a potent connection linking cinema,
psychoanalytic theory, and the question of our contemporary ecological crises. These matters
have appeared several times in close proximity in the work of Slavoj Žižek.[15] Yet, these
texts do not note this pattern of proximity nor do they organize Lynch's cinema,
psychoanalysis, and ecology in conversation. The purpose of this essay is to analyze
rigorously this theoretical network that Žižek symptomatically repeats yet leaves seemingly
unnoticed and undeveloped.
Such analysis leads to the conclusion that the perforation Lynch creates through cinematic
technique, form, and content, and the resistance to self-totalize into coherence does, however,
render a truly radical ecological aesthetic. Rather than presenting ecological ideology in a
manner that affords the spectator a sense of momentary reprieve from the environment
outside the theatre, as in Al Gore's An Inconvenient Truth , Lynch's Mulholland Drive offers a
cinematic representation of what it means to realize that I, too, as I sit and watch this screen
that also watches me, am the one who's doing it. Even in the theatre, the spectator must
confront not an inconvenient truth, but an inconvenient fantasy. The uncanny ecology of
Mulholland Drive is the Un-Heimlich and extremely uncomfortable embrace of a disarmingly
present ecology that forecloses the ideas of an inside/outside binary and the derivative
potential for escape; it is the Lynchian controversion of time (the very process that produces
"camp") that prompted Andrew Ross in 1994 to write, "If Twin Peaks was one of our first
examples of ecological camp…, as I think it was, it surely will not be the last" (Ross, 1994:
189); it is the painful but crucial process of destabilizing the fantasy-reality and subject-
object membranes that all of us erect to be able to go on.
Notes
[1]From Hopkins' "The Blessed Virgin Compared to the Air We Breathe," these lines
provide a felicitous juxtaposition of environment, food consumption, the wink, and an
uncanny consciousness of amniotic ambience.
[2]This disturbing rabbit-suited human aesthetic appears in the nine-episode series Rabbits
from 2002, available in the subscribers' and pay-per-view areas of
http://www.davidlynch.com , and the same "rabbits" play a significant if enigmatic role in
Inland Empire .
[3]Translated from the French by Michel Chion, in his David Lynch , p. 7.
[4]TheMulholland Drive website at <http://www.mulholland-
drive.net/studies/locations.htm> is an outstanding resource on the actual filming locations in
and around L.A., including Caesar's Restaurant in Gardena -- the place that poses as
Winkie's.
[5]This formula of fantasy and reality colliding in the alley behind a site of commerce
reappears in Lynch's Inland Empire . Early in the film, the visitor anticipates the protagonist,
Nikki Grace's, later confrontation with an inscrutable kernel of the real in an alleyway behind
a grocery when she tells Nikki the following story: "A little girl went out to play. Lost in the
marketplace, as if half-born. Then, not through the marketplace, you see that don't you, but
through the alley behind the marketplace. This is the way to the palace. But it isn't something
you remember."
[6]Quotation from Mike's (The One-Armed Man's) dialogue as he tells Agent Cooper during
a dream that he and Killer Bob used to live above a convenience store in Episode Two of
Twin Peaks -- another instance in Lynch connecting an uncanny and potentially fatal menace
with a modern American institution of convenient consumption.
[7]Craig Miller and John Thorne also note, though not within ecocritical concerns, the
sex/gender discrepancy in the bum behind Winkie's in their highly insightful essay
"Mulholland Drives Us Wild."
[8]See the coffee link on David Lynch's website:
<http://ecomm.davidlynch.com/catalog/coffee.php>
[9]See Nochimson, 2005, especially pp. 168-171.
[10] Though beyond the scope of this essay, Billy Wilder's Sunset Boulevard, with the dark
scene of Norma Desmond mistaking Joe Gillis for the undertaker summoned to arrange the
funeral for her dead chimpanzee, warrants a separate discussion of the presence of animals in
Los Angeles and questions of ecology.
[11] Due to the ambiguous doubling of characters, I attempt to minimize confusion by
incorporating the / (e.g. Betty/Diane) to refer to those with doppelgängers.
[12] See the "Biography for Jennifer Syme" on the Internet Movie Database:
<http://imdb.com/name/nm0843320/bio>.
[13] SeeThe Seminar of Jacques Lacan Book XI: The Four Fundamental Concepts of
Psycho-Analysis , pp. 95-6.
[14] Pink's is a deeply relevant Hollywood restaurant as a place where aspiring, failing, and
successful actors as well as fans consume nostalgic American kitsch food. Since Lynch's
film, Pink's offers a Mulholland Drive Dog for $5.20: a 10" stretch dog with grilled onions,
grilled mushrooms, nacho cheese, and bacon: http://www.pinkshollywood.com/ .
[15] SeeLooking Awry , pp. 27 and 34-43 and Enjoy Your Symptom! pp. 161-193.
Interestingly, Žižek takes a jab at Transcendental Meditation immediately following his
Lynch analysis in Enjoy . One wonders if Žižek was aware of Lynch's Yogic flier status in the
TM school and what this jab reveals about Žižek's oeuvre of Lynch analyses.
References
Chion, Michel (1995) David Lynch . Trans. Robert Julian. London: BFI.
Ciment, Michel and Hubert Niogret (1990) Interview with David Lynch, Positif 356
(October), pp. 12-20.
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (1983) Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia .
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Freud, Sigmund (1964) The Uncanny. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological
Works of Sigmund Freud , Vol. XVII. Ed. and Trans. James Strachey. London: Hogarth Press
and the Institute of Psycho-Analysis, pp. 217-252.
Lacan, Jacques (1981/1998) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis . Ed.
Jacques-Alain Miller. Trans. Alan Sheridan. New York: Norton.
Miller, Craig and John Thorne (2001) Mulholland Drives Us Wild, Wrapped in Plastic 1 (56
/ December), pp. 8-22.
Nochimson, Martha P (2005) All I Need is the Girl: The Life and Death of Creativity.
Mulholland Drive , inThe Cinema of David Lynch: American Dreams, Nightmare Visions .
Eds. Erica Sheen & Annette Davison. New York: Wallflower Press, pp. 165-181.
Rodley, Chris (2002) Lynch on Lynch . Revised Ed. London: Faber and Faber.
Ross, Andrew (1994) The Chicago Gangster Theory of Life: Nature's Debt to Society . New
York: Verso.
Turkle, Sherry (1978) Psychoanalytic Politics: Freud's French Revolution . New York: Basic
Books.
Žižek, Slavoj (1992) Looking Awry: An Introduction to Jacques Lacan through Popular
Culture . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Žižek, Slavoj (2001) Enjoy Your Symptom!: Jacques Lacan in Hollywood and Out . 2ndEd.
New York: Routledge.
Websites
Anon. (2000) Pittsburgh history series teacher's guide: WQED Pittsburgh. Available at:
http://www.wqed.org/education/pghist/units/fun/fun2.shtml [Accessed 4 June 2006].
Filmography
The Elephant Man . 1980. Dir. David Lynch. Brooksfilms.
Eraserhead . 1977. Dir. David Lynch. American Film Institute.
An Inconvenient Truth . 2006. Dir. Davis Guggenheim. Lawrence Bender Productions.
Inland Empire . 2006. Dir. David Lynch. Studio Canal.
Koyaanisqatsi . 1982. Dir. Godfrey Reggio. Santa Fe Institute for Regional Education.
Lost Highway . 1997. Dir. David Lynch. October Films.
Mulholland Drive . 2001. Asymmetrical Productions, Le Studio Canal+, Les Films Alain
Sarde.
Rabbits . 2002. Dir. David Lynch. David Lynch.com.
Sunset Boulevard . 1950. Dir. Billy Wilder. Paramount Pictures.
Twin Peaks . 1990-91. Dir. David Lynch. Lynch/Frost Productions.
Wait Till the Sun Shines, Nellie . 1953. Dir. Henry King. Twentieth-Century Fox Film
Corporation.
