Mulholland_Dr_Interview
In repo

Lynch on Mulholland Dr.By Chris RodleyINTERVIEWS—OCT 30, 2015TSHARE
he following interview was originally published in the 2005 edition ofﬁlmmaker and writer Chris Rodley’s book Lynch on Lynch. The interviewsincluded in the book were conducted by Rodley between 1993 and 2005. ForCriterion’s release of Mulholland Dr., we republished Rodley's chapter on theﬁlm, and here we present a selection of excerpts from Rodley’s conversationwith Lynch about his masterpiece Hollywood love story.So how did you ﬁrst pitch the idea to ABC as a potential TV series?I just had two pages that were read to them, and then more pitch stuﬀ to givethem a mood and more of a thing. And at that point, they were all saying,“Sounds great. Let’s do it.”But what was on those two pages?A couple of things: a woman trying to become a star in Hollywood, and at thesame time ﬁnding herself becoming a detective and possibly going into adangerous world.As the idea developed in your mind, what was it about Mulholland Dr. thatmade you fall in love with it?If someone said to you, “What was it about that girl that really made you fall inlove with her?” you couldn’t say just one thing. It’s so many things. It’severything. Same with this. You get an idea. A moment before, it wasn’t there.And it comes SO FAST! And when you get the idea, it sometimes comes with aninspiration, an energy, that ﬁres you up. Maybe the love is in the idea, and it justcomes into you. I don’t know. But the idea is really small, and then it expandsand shows itself to you so you see it completely. And then it goes to the memorybank so that you can examine it some more. It’s very complete. It’s like a seed.The tree is really there, but it’s not a tree yet. It wants to be a tree, but it’s just aseed.Sometimes an idea presents itself to you and you’re just as surprised as anyoneelse. I remember when I was writing Mulholland Dr., the character of theCowboy just came walking in one night. I just started talking about this cowboy.That’s what happens—something starts occurring, but it wasn’t there a momentago.Do you then get anxious about how this idea is going to ﬁt in witheverything else?No, because you’re just in that world yourself. You’re just going. There is nomovie yet. Until the process completes itself, you’re just going to carry on.Somewhere along the way, when it looks like it’s taking some sort of shape, therest of the ideas all gather around to see if they can ﬁt into that shape. Maybeyou’ll ﬁnd out that that thing isn’t going to work, so you save it in a box for later.You’ve got to be the audience for most of this trip. You can’t second-guess them.If you did, you’d be removing yourself from yourself. Then you’d be out there inreally dangerous territory, trying to build something for some abstract groupthat’s always changing. I think you’d fail. You’ve got to do it from the inside ﬁrstand hope for the best.Tell me about the character of Diane—or Betty—as there are twodiﬀerently named characters, both played by Naomi Watts. What do wecall her?This particular girl—Diane—sees things she wants, but she just can’t get them.It’s all there—the party—but she’s not invited. And it gets to her. You could callit fate—if it doesn’t smile on you, there’s nothing you can do. You can have thegreatest talent and the greatest ideas, but if that door doesn’t open, you’re freshout of luck. It takes so many ingredients and the door opening to ﬁnally make it.There are jokes about how in L.A. everyone is writing a script and everyone hasgot a résumé and a photo. So there’s a yearning to get the chance to expressyourself—a sort of creativity in the air. Everyone is willing to go for broke andtake a chance. It’s a modern town in that way. It’s like you want to go to LasVegas and turn that one dollar into a million dollars. Sunset Boulevard says somuch about that Hollywood dream thing to me.Did you ever feel that way about this town yourself—that it was the placeto make your career as a ﬁlmmaker?No. I came in through a weird door, and I didn’t really know about it. I arrivedhere in August 1970, at night, and I woke up in the morning, and I’d never seenthe light so bright. A feeling comes with this light—a feeling of creativefreedom. So for me it was almost an immediate full-tilt love aﬀair from then on.Hopefully, everybody ﬁnds a place where they feel good about being wherethey are—a place that does something to them. That’s L.A. to me.***I’m always intrigued by the exact time frame in a lot of your ﬁlms. […]Mulholland Dr. is deﬁantly contemporary, and yet it has a feeling that it’shappening in the past—the ﬁfties or even the thirties and forties.But that’s so much like our actual lives. Many times during the day, we plan forthe future, and many times in the day we think of the past. We’re listening toretro radio and watching retro TV. There are all kinds of opportunities to relivethe past, and there are new things coming up every second. There is some kindof present, but the present is the most elusive, because it’s going real fast.There are still many places you could go in L.A. to catch the drift of the oldgolden age, but they’re getting fewer. It’s like the old oil well that used to bewhere the Beverly Center is now. That was one of the locations we used forEraserhead, and it was one of my favorite places in the whole world. You’d goover this doughnut of earth and down inside this place, and you’d be in acompletely diﬀerent world. There were these oil tanks and this working oil welljust standing there. It was just incredible. There was a pony ride from thetwenties or the thirties. And there was this little key shop that was like four feetby four feet, with a roof. And then there was the Tail o’ the Pup hot dog stand,which has moved to another place now. And there was Hull Bros. Lumber,which was a working sawmill, I think, with a hundred-foot-tall mound ofsawdust next to it. There was also a nursery. It was all, like, from the thirties—mostly dirt, with this stuﬀ scattered around. The buildings were ancient, andguys wore those green-colored visors and armbands. They were old-timerswho knew about wood and Hollywood and everything.Why are you attracted to all of that?For me, it’s a thing that I felt as a kid in Our Gang comedies—The Little Rascals.It was feeling the thirties—a feeling of a place back in time, because it hadn’tchanged. It was like a set. This place just existed there. And then it was gone. Itbecame the Beverly Center. Now it’s just, like, a congestion of shops andparking and lights and signs. It’s just a huge change.************In its transition from TV pilot to feature ﬁlm, did Mulholland Dr. becomemore complicated?No, it got much simpler. It became obvious what it was. It was like the day I wasin the food room at the stable in AFI when we were shooting Eraserhead. We’dbeen shooting for almost a year by then, and I was drawing the Lady in theRadiator. I tried to picture the radiator in Henry’s room—which was twenty feetaway—and I couldn’t. So I went running into Henry’s room, and I looked at theradiator, and I almost started weeping for joy. It was perfect. It was uniquebecause it had a place built in it—for her. But she didn’t exist when that radiatorhad been handpicked. So the Lady in the Radiator married with what had gonebefore. I knew it already, of course. It was the same kind of thing withMulholland Dr.But there were many more elements to mesh and narrative threads to tieup in Mulholland Dr.Sure, but when you’re working on something, you have strings that go out hereand there, and they end. But one of those strings is going to continue, whileothers atrophy and fall away. You sometimes go in diﬀerent directions to ﬁndyour main path. And maybe one of those strings that were started comes backby surprise at the very end, in a diﬀerent form, and you say, “That’s how thatthing ﬁts in.” All the threads in Mulholland Dr. are tied up.The movie is full of obvious clues, but there are many other things that areimportant visual and audio indicators that are not obvious. So at times itdoes seem as if you’re delighting in teasing or mystifying the viewer.No, you never do that to an audience. An idea comes, and you make it the waythe idea says it wants to be, and you just stay true to that. Clues are beautifulbecause I believe we’re all detectives. We mull things over, and we ﬁgure thingsout. We’re always working this way. People’s minds hold things and formconclusions with indications. It’s like music. Music starts, a theme comes in, itgoes away, and when it comes back, it’s so much greater because of what’s gonebefore.But audiences have struggled with trying to work the movie out and, at acertain point, they just want you to tell them what it all means—to you.Yeah, and I always say the same thing: I think they really know for themselveswhat it’s about. I think that intuition—the detective in us—puts things togetherin a way that makes sense for us. They say intuition gives you an inner knowing,but the weird thing about inner knowing is that it’s really hard to communicatethat to someone else. As soon as you try, you realize that you don’t have thewords, or the ability to say that inner knowing to your friend. But you still knowit! It’s really frustrating. I think you can’t communicate it because the knowingis too beautifully abstract. And yet poets can catch an abstraction in words andgive you a feeling that you can’t get any other way.I think people know what Mulholland Dr. is to them, but they don’t trust it.They want to have someone else tell them. I love people analyzing it, but theydon’t need me to help them out. That’s the beautiful thing, to ﬁgure things outas a detective. Telling them robs them of the joy of thinking it through andfeeling it through and coming to a conclusion.And it doesn’t matter if that conclusion isn’t the same as yours?Right, because even if you get the whole thing, there would still be someabstract elements in it that you’d have to kind of feel-think. You’d have to say, “Ikind of understand that, but I don’t know exactly what it is.” Sort of. The framesare always the same on the ﬁlm—it’s always the same length, and the samesoundtrack is always running along it. But the experience in the room changesdepending on the audience. That’s another reason why people shouldn’t be toldtoo much, because “knowing” putreﬁes that experience.***What is it about women crying that fascinates you?I don’t know! What IS it? It’s a lot of things swimming together, I guess. I’vedone that kind of scene a few times. Maybe I’ll do it a bunch more. I don’t wantto say exactly what it is, because it won’t be enough.In Mulholland Dr., both Diane and Rita sob uncontrollably while watchingRebekah Del Rio mime to her own performance of Roy Orbison’s “Crying”at Club Silencio. How did the latter come about?That was an accident. My friend and former music agent at CAA, Brian Loucks,calls from time to time and says, “I want you to meet so-and-so, can we comeover for a coﬀee?” One day he calls me and says, “I want you to meet RebekahDel Rio.” So Rebekah comes over with Brian at ten o’clock in the morning, andbecause I’d said to John Neﬀ, “I think she’s gonna sing,” he’d set up themicrophone—a very beautiful microphone—in one of the booths in myrecording studio. Rebekah just wanted to come over for a coﬀee and sing infront of us. She didn’t want to record anything, but she came in and fourminutes later—I think before she’d had her coﬀee—she’s in the booth. And theone take that she sang, four minutes oﬀ the street, is the vocal that’s in the ﬁlm.THE ACTUAL RECORDING!The weird thing is that she chose to sing that particular Roy Orbison song. Iwas about to start shooting Blue Velvet, and “Crying” came on the radio. I said,“Je e z ! I ’ v e g o t t o g e t t h a t s o n g t o s e e i f i t w o u l d w o r k i n t h e ﬁ l m .” I n t h e e n d , i twasn’t quite right, but I started listening to other cuts, and “In Dreams” cameup. It was destined to change things in the most beautiful ways after that.Rebekah knows Barbara Orbison, Roy’s second wife, and she’s the one whotranslated “Crying” into Spanish, but it’s just so strange that that was the songthat was almost in Blue Velvet.Rebekah’s got one of the most beautiful voices in the world, so I said, “Damn,this is unbelievable!” And I start thinking about it. We listened to it after she left,and I said, “She’s gonna be in the ﬁlm.” I’d had this other idea that I’d writtendown one night, so that jumped in and provided the slot for Rebekah.The lip sync that she did when we actually shot that scene much later was, like,the best I’ve ever seen. She’s the original singer, of course, but even so, there aresingers who can’t do that—the lips and the tongue and the breaths don’t work.But this was perfect in every way.There seems to be a lot of miming in Mulholland Dr., to music—at theauditions for Adam Kesher’s movie—but also people “miming” entirelives. Is the character of Betty in some respects Diane’s “mime”?[Long pause]Someone who only becomes “real” when she plays someone else for thatbrilliant audition at Paramount Pictures?[Pause continues]Doing exactly the same scene we’ve already watched her rehearse ratherbadly with Rita? What was that all about?It’s like doing something twice—the same piece of material two diﬀerent ways.It’s always interesting. In Blue Velvet, the song “In Dreams” is played twice, andit’s got a completely diﬀerent feeling each time, and a diﬀerent meaning. Ormaybe it’s the same meaning but you see it a diﬀerent way. All the charactersare dealing somewhat with a question of identity. Like everyone.RELATED FILMS
View Comments (0)Chris Rodley is an independent ﬁlmmaker and the editor of Cronenberg onCronenberg and Lynch on Lynch.
MORE: INTERVIEWS
Courtney Love LooksBack on Her Life as aMovie StarThe beloved rock musician reﬂectson her formative experiences as anactor and her close collaborationswith directors Miloš Forman andAlex Cox.By Yasi SalekON FILM / INTERVIEWS — JUL 2, 2026
Art with a Life of Its Own:A Conversation with GaryHustwitThe director behind suchdocumentaries as Helvetica,Objectiﬁed, and Urbanized talks abouthis interest in how designers shapeour world and explains thetechnological innovation at the heartof his new ﬁlm about legendarymusician Brian Eno.By Eric SkillmanON FILM / INTERVIEWS — JUN 18, 2026
Charting the Rise of TransFilmmaking with CadenMark Gardner and WillowCatelyn MaclayThe curators of a showcase of transdirectors now playing on theCriterion Channel discuss the workof these trailblazing artists, whohave brought new layers of nuanceand insight to cinematic depictionsof their community.By Andrew ChanON FILM / INTERVIEWS — JUN 5, 2026
Writing About Cinema: AConversation with PeterCowieThe longtime Criterion Collectionand Janus Films contributor reﬂectson his role in the golden age of art-house cinema and his life as a ﬁlmcritic, historian, publisher, andfestivalgoer.By Liz HelfgottON FILM / INTERVIEWS — MAY 28, 2026
SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTERGet info about new releases, sales, and our onlinepublication, Current.E-mail AddressSIGN UPFOLLOW US
Mulholland Dr.David Lynch
EraserheadDavid Lynch
This website uses cookies to enhance user experienceand to analyze performance and traﬃc on ourwebsite.Learn MoreGOT IT!GOT IT!GOT IT!GOT IT!
