Mulholland_Drive_Academic
In repo

HomeFilm-PhilosophyVol. 9, No. 4Cinematic Ideas, on David Lynch's Mulholland Drive
>>>
The enigmatic ﬁlms of David Lynch have been interpreted from a variety of perspectives. Among these we can ﬁnd Lynchthe postmodernist ironist, Lynch the transgressive neoconservative, and Lynch the visionary explorer of the unconscious.Martha P. Nochimson's recent study, for example, presents an eloquent case for regarding Lynch as a Jungian ‘surfer of thewaves of the collective unconscious’, whose ﬁlms combine the intuitive embracing of subconscious Life Energy with acelebration of the creative power of Hollywood mythology. [1] For Nochimson, Lynch's transformation of the masculineaction hero into intuitive ‘boundary crosser’ shows the redemptive quality of his cinematic vision, which we experiencesensuously rather than comprehend rationally.Against Nochimson's ‘New Age’ Lynch -- ‘the poet of a Jungian universal subconscious spiritualised Libido’ [2] -- Slavoj Zizekhas argued that Lynch's ﬁlms can be said to expose the subject's ‘fundamental fantasy’: the ‘ultimate, proto-transcendentalframework of my desiring which, precisely as such, remains inaccessible to my subjective grasp’. [3] According to Lacan, thisis the traumatic unconscious fantasy framework that renders consistent the (gendered) subject's image of self-identity andcoherent experience of social-symbolic reality. From this point of view, according to Zizek, Lost Highway can be read aspresenting the dissolution of the ‘fundamental fantasy’ sustaining the male character's (Fred Madison/Pete Dayton's)identity, a dissolution prompted by paranoid suspicions about his wife Renee's (Patricia Arquette's) inﬁdelity and his ownsexual inadequacy. For Zizek, the two parts of the ﬁlm, the Fred/Renee story and the Pete/Alice story, are therefore relatedas social reality and fantasy. Lynch's achievement is to confront the subject's social reality with his fundamental fantasy, toshow the co-existence between ‘the aseptic drabness of social reality and the fantasmatic Real of self-destructive violence’.[4] At the same time, Lost Highway also manages, Zizek contends, to resolve the deadlock between classical andpostmodern ﬁlm noir, staging both alongside each other as two interpenetrating but ‘irrationally’ connected parts of theﬁlm.For all its enlightening power, Zizek's attempt to reconstruct the narrative logic of Lost Highway, via a Lacanianpsychoanalytic reading, suffers from what I would call a reductive ‘rationalism’ in its philosophical approach to ﬁlm. Byreductive ‘rationalism’ I mean the tendency to treat ﬁlms as illustrations of theoretical concepts or ideological perspectivesthat can be properly deciphered only once submitted to conceptual analysis or subsumed within a philosophicalmetalanguage. Against this approach, which certainly has its theoretical advantages, I want to suggest that a philosophicalencounter with ﬁlm should be an exercise in mutual reﬂection, cinema reﬂecting upon philosophical questions through itsown medium, and philosophy reﬂecting upon cinema as mode of thinking in its own right. From this perspective,philosophy does not occupy the position of a conceptual metalanguage on ﬁlm, informing us philosophically ‘what ﬁlm is’ orwhat a particular ﬁlm ‘really’ means. Rather, it is a matter of showing how ﬁlm itself is a kind of philosophising, and howphilosophy reﬂects upon what cinema forces us to think, sense, and experience. This view is well expressed in StephenMulhall's reﬂections on his philosophical approach to the Aliens quartet:‘I do not look to these ﬁlms as handy or popular illustrations of views or arguments properly developed by philosophers; Isee them rather as themselves reﬂecting on and evaluating such views and arguments, as thinking seriously andsystematically about them in just the ways that philosophers do. Such ﬁlms are not philosophy's raw material, nor a sourcefor ornamentation; they are philosophical exercises, philosophy in action -- ﬁlm as philosophising.’ [5]Lynch, I want to suggest, can be regarded as a cinematic philosopher-artist, presenting thought through sound and image(‘ideas’, to use Lynch's term). In what follows I shall explore this thesis by considering one of Lynch's most challenging ﬁlms,Mulholland Drive, a ﬁlm that we can ‘understand’ by being attentive to not only to its complex narrative structure, but also tothe role of what I shall call ‘cinematic Ideas’. Although Lynch never really explains what he means, I take cinematic Ideas tomean visual and aural sequences that combine images and sounds liberated from a purely narrative function with imagesevincing a complex cinematic reﬂexivity. This striking conjunction of sensuous immediacy and complex reﬂection is thehallmark of Lynch's cinematic world. In a manner recalling Kant's ‘aesthetic ideas’, Lynch's cinematic Ideas are presentationsof the imagination that exceed conceptual determination and linguistic expression. They are inexhaustible imaginativerepresentations open to inﬁnite interpretation. [6]As Lynch fans have surmised, the greater part of Mulholland Drive seems to be an extended ‘dream/fantasy sequence’ thatoccupies around two-thirds of the ﬁlm. In the ﬁnal third we see a version of the ‘real events’ that led Diane Selwyn (NaomiWatts) to arrange the murder of her former lover Camilla Rhodes (Laura Elena Harring), an event culminating in Diane'spsychotic breakdown and (possible) suicide. This is the way many critics approach the ﬁlm, although most alsoacknowledge the limits to any straightforward ‘dream/reality’ interpretation. [7] At the same time, the references to SunsetBoulevard, to Gilda, to ﬁlm production and direction, but also to performance art (in the Club Silencio sequence at the endof the ﬁlm), all suggest that this is a ﬁlm about Hollywood as well as a reﬂection upon the fantasmatic nature of ﬁlm itself.According to Lynch's enigmatic DVD ‘Synopsis’, Mulholland Drive has a tripartite structure, which I suggest we cansummarise as follows: 1. ‘She Found Herself the Perfect Mystery’ (Diane's dream/fantasy: Rita's car crash, the Maﬁa subplot,the mystery of Rita's identity, and discovery of a woman's corpse); 2. ‘A Sad Illusion’ (Rita's transformation and theunravelling of Diane's dream/fantasy: the Club Silencio revelation that her love for Rita, her fantasised dream version ofevents, and the Hollywood dream factory, are all illusory); 3. ‘Love’ (The ‘real’ story of Diane's affair with Camilla, Camilla'sbetrayal of Diane, Diane's plot to have Camilla murdered, Diane's psychotic breakdown and apparent suicide, and the ﬁnaldissolution of the ‘fantasy/reality’ framework). To be schematic, the ﬁrst two-thirds of the ﬁlm comprise Diane'sfantasised/dream version of events (Parts One and Two), while the last third (Part Three) presents the ‘real’ version ofevents from which Diane's fantasy/dream version, which we see ﬁrst, is retroactively constructed. At the same time,elements from each part intrude upon the others, blurring the boundaries between dream, fantasy, reality, and cinematicworlds. As I shall discuss, the ﬁlm ends on a decidedly ‘undecidable’ note, with the dissolution of any stable narrativeframework that would allow us to separate the dimensions of ‘subjective fantasy’ and ‘objective reality’.1. ‘She Found Herself the Perfect Mystery’Part One (with its intentional play on ‘herself’) is best described as Diane Selwyn's dream or fantasy version of herself as‘Betty Elms’, a wish-fulﬁlling rationalisation of events that absolves her of responsibility for Camilla Rhodes's death. It beginswith the ﬂickering image of a sign, ‘Mulholland Dr.’, and a dark limousine in the night, snaking its way along MulhollandDrive, accompanied by Angelo Badalamenti's haunting theme. We witness the terrible car accident that befalls ‘Rita’ (LauraElena Harring) just before she is about to be killed, her dazed escape into the Los Angeles night, and her hiding in a retro-chic Lynchian apartment.Thus far, the narrative is straightforward, with obvious allusions to Sunset Boulevard and Kiss Me Deadly. But with Rita fallingasleep on the bed, we cut abruptly to a young man (Dan) sitting in a Winkie's diner on Sunset Boulevard. Dan proceeds todescribe his dream, or nightmare, in which he is seated at this same Winkie's table, utterly terriﬁed, and sees hiscompanion (Herb), perhaps his therapist, looking across at Dan from the counter. Dan tells his companion, ‘there's a man. . . in back of this place. He's the one . . . he's the one who's doing it . . . I hope I never see that face ever outside of a dream’.They both head outside to confront Dan's nightmarish fear, and sure enough there is a man out back, an abject homeless‘bum’, whose piercing gaze is enough to make the young man collapse and die.The ﬁlm then takes another unsettling turn. We see a striking sequence of images: the mysterious Mr Roque's ear andmouth (Michael J. Anderson), as he delivers a curious telephone message (‘The girl is still missing’); the back of a large man'shead, who conveys this message (‘The same’) to another party, reduced to a muscular arm, who then calls up a room with ared lamp and dark telephone. (As we later learn, this telephone and red lamp are in Diane's own apartment, which onlydeepens the mystery of who is behind the plot to have Rita killed). At this point, however, we can only assume that themissing girl must be Rita, and that her life is in danger from unknown malevolent forces.We are then introduced to the radiant Betty Elms, Diane's fantasised version of herself, who has arrived in Hollywood (‘fromDeep River, Ontario’) to pursue an acting career. We follow Betty's arrival in Los Angeles, accompanied by the helpful‘grandparent’ ﬁgures of the opening sequence. We follow Betty to her Aunt Ruth's magniﬁcent (Lynchian) apartment, whereshe discovers the mysterious Rita in the shower. (Aunt Ruth, we learn later, is dead, and has left Diane an inheritance,which she spends on hiring a hit man to kill Camilla). In Diane's fantasy, Camilla is a beautiful stranger who is left amnesiacafter a car accident. When asked for her name, the stranger says ‘Rita’, inspired by a glimpse of Rita Hayworth in a movieposter for Gilda. The ‘perfect mystery’ Betty has found herself -- which Diane herself turns out to be -- is to discover whothis beautiful stranger is, to solve the mystery of Rita's, and thus her own, identity.This is where the complicated Maﬁa/Mr Roque subplot comes into play. It is part of Diane's elaborate dream/fantasy as theinnocent Betty, who sacriﬁces her own chance at success in order to help Rita hide her true identity. For Diane thesigniﬁcance of this elaborate conspiracy plot is manifold. It provides a rationale for why director Adam Kesher cannotchoose her alter ego Betty for the lead in his ﬁlm (effectively replacing Rita/Camilla). It provides a way for Diane to splitCamilla Rhodes into an idealised love object (Rita), and a despised fake (the blonde Camilla Rhodes played by MelissaGeorge) linked to the criminal underworld. Finally, it enables Diane to displace her terrible guilt over the killing of CamillaRhodes into a convoluted plot involving various malevolent and powerful ﬁgures.Inside Ryan Entertainment offices director Adam Kesher is being counselled ‘to keep an open mind’ about re-casting hislead actress (presumably Rita, who is ‘still missing’). Maﬁa mobsters the Castigliane Brothers inform the protesting Kesherthat, ‘It's no longer your ﬁlm’: he cannot choose the lead actress because she has already been chosen. ‘This is the girl’,Kesher is told, and we are shown a headshot of a young starlet (Melissa George) bearing the name ‘Camilla Rhodes’.The line, ‘This is the girl’, we later realise, is a repetition of Diane Selwyn's instruction to Joe, the blonde hit man: ‘This is thegirl’, meaning the ‘real’ Camilla Rhodes (Laura Elena Harring) whose murder they are plotting. The young starlet (MelissaGeorge), who in Diane's fantasy appears as the Maﬁa's choice for the lead in Kesher's ﬁlm, reappears in the third part of theﬁlm as dark haired Camilla's new lesbian love interest. Within Diane's fantasy, the starlet (Melissa George) is ‘CamillaRhodes’, while the ‘real’ Camilla Rhodes (Laura Elena Harring) becomes the amnesiac Rita, target of a murderous plot, whoﬁnds refuge with innocent Betty.The rest of this ﬁrst part concerns Betty's quest to solve the ‘perfect mystery’ of Rita's identity. They open Rita's designerpurse and discover two disturbing clues: a large amount of money and a beautiful blue key. (As we shall discover, thistriangular key -- perhaps alluding to the triangle between Diane/Camilla/Adam -- is the key to Rita's identity but also toDiane's (murderous) desire.) The key and the money trigger Rita's memory: ‘Mulholland Drive: That's where I was going!’They hide the money in a hatbox and head off to ﬁnd out whether there was an accident on Mulholland Drive the previousnight. At the same Winkie's diner we encountered before, Rita observes the nametag of a waitress with short blonde hair --‘Diane’ -- and has a ﬂash of recognition: ‘Diane Selwyn. Maybe that's my name!’ A telephone call to D. Selwyn -- ‘It's strangeto be calling yourself!’ remarks Betty, in a moment of irony -- reveals that Rita is not Diane after all. ‘That's not my voice’, Ritaobserves, ‘But I know her’, as she most certainly does.This irony is deepened in Betty's rehearsal of the scene for her upcoming audition. The cliched script has Betty and Ritaacting out a scene that reﬂects and anticipates the torrid love affair between Diane and Camilla. Rita plays the moreexperienced seducer while Betty is the corrupted innocent, driven to toy with the idea of murder in an ambivalentexpression of desire and despair. Betty's stunning performance, turning the hackneyed scene into a moment of dangerouspassion, reveals her talent. At the same time, it also preﬁgures the despairing and violent end to the traumatic relationshipbetween Diane and Camilla.A casting agent whisks Betty off to meet exciting young director Adam Kesher. Betty of course arrives just after Kesher hasobediently chosen the Castigliane designated girl, the blonde ‘Camilla Rhodes’ (Melissa George), as the lead for ‘The SylviaNorth Story’. Betty and Adam lock eyes in a Hollywood moment of recognition, electric with possibilities: this is ‘the girl’ forKesher, perhaps as a lover and as a future star. But just when Diane/Betty's dreams are about to be realised, she rushes offto help her beloved Rita. (In reality, the depressive Diane's audition was a dismal failure; she didn't get the part, which wentto Camilla; but she did start an affair with her, which turned toxic and violent).With Betty in a smart grey suit (recalling Madeleine in Vertigo), they track down Diane Selwyn's apartment, and break in toinvestigate. The ﬁrst part concludes with the shocking discovery of a corpse (fusing Diane's blonde hair with Camilla's blackdress) rotting in a bedroom that in ‘real life’ belongs to Diane herself. The mysterious amnesiac, the beautiful Rita, issomehow connected with a woman's murder. In reality, as we later learn, the reverse is true: it is Camilla who has beenkilled and it is Diane (not the Maﬁa or Mr Roque) who is responsible for her death. In Diane's fantasy turned nightmare,however, the corpse Betty and Rita discover is a fusion of them both: it stands in for Camilla's murder (hence the shortblack dress) but also preﬁgures Diane's suicidal end (hence the blonde hair). With this ‘impossible’ encounter the ﬁrst partcomes to a shocking end. The traumatised Rita runs from the apartment, silently screaming, as the image multiplies andshatters, along with Rita's fractured identity.2. ‘A Sad Illusion’Part Two begins with Betty helping Rita to cut her hair and don a blonde wig. This caesura now reverses the roles betweenBetty and Rita, with Rita coming to the fore and Betty retreating into the background. The hair cutting, at one level, impliesthat Rita, with her money and key, is connected with the corpse and must therefore change her identity (becoming in effecta reﬂection of Betty/Diane). At a deeper level, however, it suggests that Diane tacitly acknowledges her own guilt, turningRita into her double after it becomes clear that Rita has been involved in a murder. Once this transformation/reversal iscomplete, Betty and Diane can consummate their relationship and make passionate love. We see a striking image of theirsleeping faces merging into one (an allusion to Bergman's Persona), which is interrupted by Rita's otherworldly chanting ofthe word ‘Silencio’. She wakes up, as if from a trance, and they head off -- amidst disorienting images of the darker parts ofLA -- to Club Silencio, an elegant ‘underground’ theatre.This is probably the most extraordinary sequence of the ﬁlm, the ‘eye of the duck scene’, as Lynch would say. [8] Thedevilish ‘Magician’ hosting Club Silencio unmasks what we are seeing and hearing as illusion: ‘no hay banda! There is noband, it's all a tape recording, and yet we hear a band . . . it is an illusion’. It is the aesthetic illusion of cinematicperformance, of the sounds we have been hearing, of the images we have been watching. We hear a thunderclap, seeﬂashing blue light, hear a muffled explosion (recalling the sound we hear at the very end of the opening Jitterbugsequence), sounds which prompt Betty to shudder uncontrollably. His task of unmasking illusion completed, the Magiciandisappears in thick smoke (recalling Rita's car crash and anticipating Diane's suicide).Then we see ‘Cookie’ -- who earlier appeared as the ﬂophouse proprietor helping Kesher hide from the Mob -- introducingRebekah del Rio, ‘La Lloranda des Los Angeles’, who walks on stage in a daze to deliver her Spanish rendition of RoyOrbison's ‘Crying’. [9] Rebekah del Rio's performance is a crucial moment in the Club Silencio sequence (which is dividedinto the Magician's unmasking of what we've been seeing and hearing as illusion, and Rebekah del Rio's ‘message’ to Ritaand Betty, revealing the illusory nature of their love). As Betty and Rita watch, distressed and mesmerised, Rebekah del Riocollapses and ‘dies’ on stage, Cookie carrying her from view, while her disembodied voice reaches an exquisite crescendo.Del Rio's performance and (symbolic) death thus stage aurally and visually the death that Diane has reinvented as herfantasy love affair with Rita. Betty and Rita apprehend that what we have seen is an illusion, that the love between them isimpossible, for Rita, as Camilla, is already dead.The Club Silencio sequence is a perfect Lynchian cinematic Idea, synthesising the aesthetics of pre-conscious experiencewith a self-conscious reﬂection upon cinematic illusion. It evokes the night-world of art, and of unconscious desire (Rita'schanting of ‘Silencio! No hay banda!). It evokes the underworld of the Hollywood ‘dream factory’, the suppressed Hispanicworld of culture (expressed beautifully by La Lloranda's performance). It performs the aesthetic power of cinema, of thedisembodied voice, the liberating ambiguity of cinematic illusion. And it is also the aesthetic medium for the unconsciousmessage that Rita and Betty apprehend through Rebekah del Rio's song and startling collapse on stage. The key to themystery is now revealed: what we have been viewing is a fantasy version of what has already happened: Rita/Camilla'sdeath, recorded and transﬁgured through beautiful cinematic illusion.Having intuited these meanings, Betty opens her bag and ﬁnds a mysterious blue box, the key for which Rita had found inher bag earlier in the ﬁlm. Betty and Rita rush back to the apartment to unlock it and resolve the mystery of Rita's identity.At this point, Diane's fantasy starts to disintegrate. Betty disappears as Rita recovers her bag and puts the key in the box;she opens it, the camera disappears into its black core, and the box falls to the ﬂoor. Here we touch the dark secret ofBetty/Diane (her murderous desire), and the truth of Rita/Camilla's identity: her brutal murder, which becomes the sourceof Diane's death wish, her desire for Silencio.The second part concludes with a transitional sequence: a puzzled Aunt Ruth returns to a now tidy apartment (so we arestill in Diane's fantasy since Aunt Ruth is dead). The location momentarily sways and vanishes to reveal the dark corridor inDiane's apartment. We see two images of the dead woman we saw earlier. First, a woman in a black dress sleeping on thebed in Diane's apartment, as the Cowboy looks in, saying, ‘Hey, pretty girl. Time to wake up.’ And then the same woman,now a rotting corpse -- a fusion of Diane and Camilla in death -- as the Cowboy looks in again and departs in silence. [10] Aloud knocking at the door marks the transition to Diane Selwyn's ‘real’ bedroom, with the same dark pink bed sheets,pillows, and green blanket that we saw at the end of the Jitterbug sequence that opened the ﬁlm. At this point, we return to‘real life’, with a pale and lifeless Diane awakening in her drab apartment.3. ‘Love’Part 3 rehearses the ‘real’ story of Diane's failed relationship with Camilla, her plot to kill Camilla out a desire for revenge,and her psychotic breakdown and suicide. As Diane awakens, we see how different she seems from Betty (her hair ismousier, her teeth are poor, she seems drained of all vitality). Diane is in a state of depression, or of shock, shuffling toopen the door in her dirty robe. The terrible deed has been done, signalled by the blue key left on Diane's coffee table. Herneighbour's mention of ‘three weeks’ since they swapped apartments provides us with a timeframe, as does the ashtrayshe has come to collect, clearly visible on the table during ﬂashbacks of the affair between Diane and Camilla. Dianehallucinates the luminous image of Camilla, dazzling and unearthly: ‘You've come back!’ Diane cries before the uncannyﬁgure. The image cuts suddenly -- crossing the line in a disorientating manner -- to a now composed Diane, standing wherethe apparition of Camilla previously stood. Has there been a temporal jump? Are these the moments before Dianefantasises her alternative reality? The ﬁlm gives us no ﬁrm answers, or rather offers multiple possibilities.What follows is a ﬂashback sequence, deftly cutting from depressive Diane and her cup of coffee to a hot and sweaty Dianemaking love with Camilla. Camilla abruptly cuts short their lovemaking: ‘We shouldn't do this anymore’. ‘Don't ever say that!’Diane warns, trying to force herself on Camilla. ‘It's him, isn't it?’ Diane asks, meaning Kesher. The disintegration of theirrelationship is crushingly portrayed in a scene where Camilla makes Diane watch her and Adam rehearsing a kiss thatclearly signals the reality of their own passion. [11] This breakdown culminates with Diane's painful masturbation scene: afailure to climax that signals -- through blurred, jerky, point of view shots of the stony wall -- not only her tears andhumiliation but the disintegration of her fantasy and her growing desire for revenge.In a reprise of an earlier sequence, we cut to a telephone ringing in Diane's ﬂat -- the same telephone near the red lampthat we previously saw in the Mr Roque/Maﬁa subplot. In this earlier sequence, the mysterious Mr Roque conveyed acryptic message -- ‘The girl is still missing’ -- that culminated in the call to the black telephone by the red lamp in what wenow see is Diane's room. In the ‘real’ version of events, however, it is Camilla calling to invite Diane to come to a party at6980 Mulholland Drive. Now the opening sequence of the ﬁlm is repeated, with the same limousine snaking its way at night,but this time with Diane in the back seat. The same music and dialogue are heard as before but now with a different sense:‘What are you doing!’ asks Diane, ‘We don't stop here!’ Instead of a gun appearing, however, Diane is met by Rita, whosmiles and leads her hand-in-hand up to Kesher's party.The uncanny effect of this part of the ﬁlm rests on its repetition, reversal, and displacement of elements that weredifferently conﬁgured in the ﬁrst two parts. At Kesher's party Diane meets the ‘real’ Coco -- actually Adam's mother, who isdecidedly cool rather than welcoming towards her -- and tells her sad story: ‘I'm from Deep River, Ontario . . . I alwayswanted to come here. I won this Jitterbug contest. That sort of lead to acting, wanting to act.’ Her Aunt Ruth died and leftsome money that would allow her to follow her dream (but which she will spend on destroying Camilla). Diane and Camillamet on the set of ‘The Sylvia North Story’, but Camilla got the part that Diane wanted, the lead role (director Bob Brookerdidn't like her, whereas her fantasy performance is stunning). Coco pats her hand in a vague gesture of sympathy.Four vignettes follow that provide the source material for Diane's fantasy. As Diane drinks her coffee, Kesher amusinglytells of his marriage break-up: ‘I got the pool, and she got the pool guy!’ Kesher's quip provides the germ for his fantasisedhumiliation by his cheating wife and her beefcake lover (Billy Ray Cyrus). With Camilla and Kesher laughing together, Dianesees an older man (Angelo Badalamenti) staring at her aggressively from across the room. As Calvin Thomas has argued,this becomes the source image for the espresso-vomiting Castigliane gangster who acts out the abject disgust that Dianefeels because of her humiliation at the hands of Adam and Camilla. [12] Then the girl we have seen previously as the onefoisted on Kesher (Melissa George) comes over and kisses Camilla sensually, glances knowingly at Diane, and walks off. Thisminor but devastating event provides the source image for Diane's vision of the girl designated by the Maﬁa to get the leadrole. In reality, this girl is Camilla's new lesbian love interest, usurping Diane, who recasts her in her dream/fantasy versionas a sullen Maﬁa puppet. Then we see the ‘Cowboy’ brieﬂy in the background, who becomes the bizarre enforcer sent by MrRoque to warn Kesher to ‘ﬁx his attitude’ and choose the right girl. In a ﬁnal moment of humiliation, Adam and Camillalaughingly announce their engagement, as Diane cries in quiet rage.From this ﬂashback we jump forward to the ‘real’ Winkie's diner scene where Diane is doing her evil deal: ‘This is the girl’she tells Joe, the blonde hit man, shoving a photo of dark-haired Camilla Rhodes before him. The ‘real’ Betty, however, turnsout to be a cheerful Winkie's waitress with blonde hair reminiscent of Diane's, her face and nametag coalescing in Diane'sreinvention of herself as Betty Elms. Diane's elaborate dream/fantasy thus allows her to rationalise her failure inHollywood, to displace her guilt about Camilla's death to another party (Mr Roque and/or the Maﬁa), and to preserve herfantasy image of Rita as idealised object of desire. The Maﬁa conspiracy and the sinister Mr Roque thus serve no othernarrative purpose than to exonerate Diane, to expiate her own guilt through a beautiful (cinematic) illusion.Back in Winkie's Diner, Diane opens her purse and hands over the money. ‘When it's ﬁnished’, the hit man tells her, holdingup a blue key, ‘you'll ﬁnd this where I told you’. In Diane's fantasy, this becomes the stylised triangular blue key that Rita,rather than Betty, ﬁnds in her bag. Indeed, it is only after Betty experiences intimations of the truth during Rebekah delRio's song and symbolic death that she can discover the other half of the mystery, the blue box that she ﬁnds in her own,rather than Rita's, handbag. Her terrible secret can ﬁnally be unlocked.While sealing the deathly deal, Diane looks up and sees the young man at the counter (Dan) whom we met earlier inWinkie's diner. In Diane's dream/fantasy, Dan (rhyming vaguely with Diane) becomes the personiﬁcation of her ownsuppressed conscience, embodying the ‘god-awful feeling’ of guilt that is crystallised in Dan's fatal encounter with the evilforce (the ‘bum’) behind Winkie's. This again is an inversion that neatly deﬂects guilt from Diane, attributing it to an abjectsource of evil outside of herself, literally behind the Winkie's diner where she sealed Camilla's fate. We know what the bluekey means (Camilla has been murdered). ‘What does it open?’ Diane asks, as the hit man laughs. For what this LynchianPandora's Box reveals is the seductive, mysterious, and nightmarish world of Mulholland Drive itself. By way of an answer toDiane's question, the camera returns to the back of Winkie's Diner, now bathed in red light, where we ﬁnd the abject ‘bum’,sitting by a ﬁre and fondling the blue box. He puts it in a paper bag and lets it drop to the ground (a decayed version of theopening of the blue box, which Rita too drops to the ﬂoor in Aunt Ruth's apartment). The camera pans down to thediscarded box from which screeching ﬁgures, the old couple that Betty met on her way to LA, come scuttling out.We cut to a shot of the blue key on the coffee table in Diane's apartment, hours later on the day after Camilla has beenkilled. Diane stares at the key on the table, her face and body trembling. There is a loud knocking (perhaps the twodetectives looking for Diane?) as we see the miniature ‘grandparents’ climb in under the door. Amidst ﬂashing blue light,and maniacal laughter, Diane's eyes begin to ﬂicker as screams ﬁll the air. The creepy couple, now adult-sized, chase theterriﬁed Diane into her bedroom. Screaming Diane collapses on her bed and shoots herself in the mouth. Eerie smoke risesabove her, like the smoke from the car wreck that saved Rita from her death and Diane from unbearable guilt.The smoke dissolves to several images superimposed on each other: the face of the abject ‘bum’, now melancholy andserene, the stage curtain of Club Silencio, the LA skyline at night, illuminated by lights, smiling images of Betty and Rita,blindingly white, resolving ﬁnally to the empty interior of Club Silencio, bathed in ﬂuctuating blue light. This cinematic Ideacrystallises all the essential elements of Mulholland Drive, showing them coexisting simultaneously in different, yetinterconnected temporal dimensions, narrative lines, and subjective points of view. Finally, we dissolve to the mysteriousandrogynous ﬁgure with blue hair, glimpsed earlier in the Club Silencio sequence, now sitting alone in the empty theatre,regal and remote, whispering the closing word of the ﬁlm, ‘Silencio’.This extraordinary concluding section raises many intriguing questions. One is whether what we have seen in the ﬁlmreally is simply Diane's dream or fantasy, in contrast to the ‘real’ version of events that comprises the third part of the ﬁlm.There are certainly many visual and aural cues to think that this is the case. Yet this approach presupposes that we shouldreconceptualize what we see in the ﬁrst two-thirds as a subjective fantasy, taking what we see in the last third as the‘objective reality’, the true account of the events narrated in the ﬁrst part. This separation of fantasy and reality, however, isprecisely what the concluding sequence undermines, since the ﬁlm does not conclude with Diane's suicide but rather with areprise of the image of the abject ‘bum’, seemingly only a fantasy projection of Diane's murderous impulses. Now that shehas killed herself, the image of the ‘bum’ ﬂoats disconnected from her subjectivity, taking on an uncanny life and force of itsown. It could be that this last sequence comprises the fantasy images of Diane's dying consciousness, concluding with thereal moment of her death: the ﬁnal Silencio. At the same time, however, we can view this ﬁnal sequence as a crystallisationof the entire ﬁlm: the close-up of bum's face, the smiling images of Betty and Rita (with blonde wig), the LA night skyline,and Club Silencio curtains, all coexisting within the cinematic dream world of Mulholland Drive.This would suggest that the ﬁlm does adopt an ‘objective’ point of view in the concluding sequence. These images are notsimply expressions of Diane's subjective fantasy, or her psychotic breakdown, which means that we can no longer separateher fantasy world from the ‘objective’ diegetic world of the other characters. The concluding images ﬂoat in anindeterminate zone between fantasy and reality, which is perhaps the genuinely metaphysical dimension of the cinematicimage. [13] Once these images are no longer anchored to the subjectivity of a character, or located within the objectivediegesis of the narrative, they become inexhaustible cinematic Ideas that escape our attempts to determine any possibledeﬁnitive meaning.Lynch's genius is to achieve this simultaneous reﬂexivity and sensuous immediacy through cinematic Ideas that combinepopular culture with aesthetic modernism, lyrical fantasy with unconscious trauma, Romantic love with sexual mystery. Thisis achieved in a ﬁlm that presents a powerful critique of the destructive hegemonic power of Hollywood, while performing amarvellous demonstration of the creative possibilities of cinematic art. The mystery of Mulholland Drive is how thesedimensions of fantasy, trauma, and art can coexist, magically transﬁgured, within the Lynchian world of cinematic Ideas.NotesMy thanks to Louise D'Arcens and Doris McIlwain for invaluable insights, and to Calvin Thomas for permission to cite hisexcellent study of the ﬁlm.1. Martha P. Nochimson, The Passion of David Lynch: Wild at Heart in Hollywood (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1992).2. For Zizek, Nochimson is ‘focused on the ﬂow of Life Energy that allegedly connects all events and runs through all scenesand persons, turning Lynch into the poet of a Jungian universal subconscious spiritualized libido’ -- Zizek, The Art of theRidiculous Sublime: On David Lynch's Lost Highway (Seattle: Walter Chapin Centre for the Humanities, 2000), p. 3.3. Ibid., p. 204. Ibid., p. 13.5. Stephen Mulhall, On Film (London: Routledge, 2002), p. 2.6. For Kant, an aesthetic idea is ‘an intuition of the imagination’ that resists determinate conceptualisation, ‘so that nolanguage can express it completely and allow us to grasp it’. See Critique of Judgment, trans. Werner S. Pluhar (Indiana:Hackett, 1987), pp. 215-217.7. See, for example: Bill Wyman, Max Garrone, and Andy Klein, ‘Everything You Wanted to Know About Mulholland Drive’,Salon, October 23, 2001 <http://archive.salon.com/ent/movies/feature/2001/10/23/mulholland_drive_analysis>; accessed 19September 2004. Allen B. Ruch, ‘‘No hay banda’: A Long, Strange Trip Down David Lynch's Mulholland Drive’, The ModernWord, 6 February 2003 <http://www.themodernword.com/mulholland_drive.html>; accessed 25 January 2005. For adissenting view see Martha P. Nochimson, ‘‘All I Need is the Girl’: The Life and Death of Cinematic Creativity in MulhollandDrive’ in Erica Sheen and Annette Davison, eds, The Cinema of David Lynch: American Dreams, Nightmare Visions (London:Wallﬂower Press, 2004), pp. 165-181.8. See Nochimson for Lynch's explanation of the ‘eye of the duck scene’, The Passion of David Lynch, pp. 24-27. This is aseemingly gratuitous moment that preﬁgures the end but without being a conventional narrative climax.9. Critics have passed over the use of Hispanic performers in the Club Silencio sequence, which evokes the hiddenunderworld of Hollywood, and suppressed artistic culture of Los Angeles. Thus in Betty's fantasy, ‘Cookie’ plays a Hispanicunderling (the helpful proprietor of the ﬂophouse where Kesher hides), but returns in the Club Silencio sequence tointroduce Rebekah del Rio, ‘La Lloranda of Los Angeles’. As Nicholas Gessler points out (thanks to Stanley Allen), ‘‘LaLloranda’ (literally ‘the weeping woman’) is an Hispanic folk tale about a woman who is jilted by her husband. In despair shedrowns their two children in the river, then after nights of weeping in remorse she drowns herself. Her ghostly sobs areoften heard in the night’. See Gessler, ‘David Lynch -- Mulholland Drive: An Independent Analysis’, 29 September 2002<http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/geog/gessler/topics/mulholland-drive.htm>.10. We see the Cowboy twice (in Diane's bedroom) because, not Kesher, but Diane has ‘done bad’, as we soon learn.11. This scene perhaps forms the basis for Betty's powerful audition scene kissing Woody Katz, where she acts out kookydirector Bob Brooker's cryptic advice: ‘Don't play it for real until it gets real’.12. See Calvin Thomas's convincing analysis of this scene as a paradigmatic case of the Freudian dream-work in his ‘It's NoLonger Your Film’: Condensation, Displacement, and Abjection in David Lynch's Mulholland Drive’ (unpublished manuscript).13. The ‘metaphysical’ dimension of the cinematic image would be that which lies beyond the manifest content andconventional form of the image. For Lynch, this would mean the dimension of pure cinematic Ideas, complex sound andimage ensembles that resist conceptual explication and linguistic translation.Robert Sinnerbrink, ‘Cinematic Ideas: David Lynch's Mulholland Drive’, Film-Philosophy, vol. 9 no. 34, June 2005<http://www.ﬁlm-philosophy.com/vol9-2005/n34sinnerbrink>.

Cinematic Ideas, on David Lynch's Mulholland DriveMulholland DriveMulholland DriveMulholland DriveAuthor: Robert SinnerbrinkAUTHORS INFO & AFFILIATIONSPDF/EPUBOpen accessResearch ArticleNovember 2005Publication: Film-PhilosophyVolume 9, Issue 4https://doi.org/10.3366/ﬁlm.2005.0034HomeFilm-PhilosophyVol. 9, No. 4Cinematic Ideas, on David Lynch's Mulholland Drive>>>
Journal HomeCurrent IssueAll IssuesSubmitAboutSubscribe
