One_Flew_Academic
In repo

ORIGINAL ARTICLEOpen AccessThe Irony of Liberation in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's NestFirst published: 06 May 2026| https://doi.org/10.1111/jacc.70067|  VIEW METRICSABSTRACTLaura Hirshbein
The 1975 !lm One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest vividly portrays the tragic consequences ofrepressive psychiatric authority. The !lm was—and remains—one of the mostmemorable and well-known products of anti-psychiatry sentiment. Opponents ofAmerican psychiatry from the time period of Cuckoo's Nest objected to what they saw associal control rather than the profession's e"orts to help people. But viewed in thehistorical context of psychiatry, the representation in the !lm ironically undermined thework of some members of the profession who were trying to reform society to addressinequities, including social causes and consequences of mental illness. Socialpsychiatrists, a loose group within the !eld from the late 1940s through the late 1970s,conducted research and promoted policies to combat poverty and racism. Withinpsychiatry, critics of social psychiatrists' expansive vision used anti-psychiatry activism tojustify narrowing the focus of the profession toward individual diagnoses andmedications.The !lm version of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, based on the 1963 novel by author KenKesey 1963, was a powerful critique of institutional psychiatry at the time of its release in1975. Cuckoo's Nest, like a number of works of !ction and non!ction from the 1960s and1970s, suggested that psychiatry was illegitimate—not a medical specialty but rather asystem of social control (Grob 2011). It is ironic that the !lm version of one of the morenotorious anti-psychiatry works from the 1960s landed at the same time that one of itsprimary foci of criticism—the psychiatric institution—was in decline. As sociologist AnneParsons has pointed out, the !lm was made and released after psychiatric institutions hadalready begun to empty. Changes in laws, the widespread use of potent psychiatricmedications, and contracting state budgets all led to substantial decreases in statepsychiatric hospital populations by the mid-1980s (Parsons 2018).At the time when the !lm was released, American psychiatry was in a period of upheaval. Asnumerous historians have described, leaders in the !eld who were aligned withpsychoanalysis began to make way for a new generation of psychiatrists in an emergingmovement toward biological psychiatry (Grob 1994; Harrington 2019; Shorter 1997). Thebiological group was the one responsible for the categorical diagnoses that appeared for the!rst time in the 1980 third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-III)(Decker 2013). But a third group of professionals who identi!ed themselves as socialpsychiatrists, less often featured in psychiatric histories, were earnestly trying to use theirexpertise to address major social issues such as poverty and racism.Social psychiatrists used many of the same critiques of the !eld as a growing group ofpeople entirely opposed to psychiatry. Former psychiatric patients who objected to theirtreatment, legal advocates representing patients, and critics who objected to psychiatricpower loosely cohered in what historians have described as an anti-psychiatry movement(Grob 2011; Staub 2011). Psychiatrist and critic Thomas Szasz articulated one of themovement's core beliefs, that mental illness was a myth (Thomas Szasz 1961). Szasz did notdeny that some people su"ered distress, but he argued that they should be treated ino$ces on a voluntary basis. Szasz and others insisted that there was no role for a professionthat purported to treat patients within the con!nes of an institution. Szasz argued, in fact,that mental patients were the modern equivalent of slaves con!ned within inhumanewarehouses, viewed as the lowest rung of society's ladder (Thomas S. Szasz 1971).Anti-psychiatry activists in the 1960s and 1970s further insisted that psychiatrists' socialcontrol was detrimental to people who were struggling because of broader social issues.Many framed the liberation from psychiatry as freedom from the hospital, which theCuckoo's Nest !lm reinforced. Yet anti-psychiatry e"orts ultimately undermined socialpsychiatry reformers who wanted to use the power and authority of the profession to makea di"erence in society as a whole. In historical context, the irony of the !lm is that thecriticism to which Cuckoo's Nest contributed helped to push psychiatry toward a morenarrow and biologically essentialist approach, one that is the subject of contemporary anti-psychiatry critique (Whitaker 2010).This article uses themes from the !lm as a window into the broader conversation withinAmerican psychiatry and the ways in which anti-psychiatry pushed against some of theliberation goals of social psychiatry. One of the most obvious themes is the hospital as thesite of psychiatric power. Another is the importance of group dynamics, both structured (asin the group therapy conducted by Nurse Ratched) and unstructured (when the patients goout on their own, led by McMurphy). The !lm calls out the capricious nature of psychiatricdiagnosis and the potential for ostensible treatment to be used as punishment. Finally, the!lm raises questions about the dynamics of White women and Black men in psychiatry andmental illness. One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest itself is an important work within !lm studies.As a piece of anti-psychiatry criticism, it deserves to be viewed within the context of thehistory of a more complex psychiatric profession. Anti-psychiatry activists centered on thehospital—which was already in decline. But conservative elements within psychiatry usedanti-psychiatry critique to shut down social psychiatrists who were pushing for social reform.By emphasizing the repression of the hospital, critics of psychiatry—includingrepresentations within Cuckoo's Nest—obscured the liberatory potential of social psychiatry.1 The FilmThe !lm version of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest was produced by Michael Douglas anddirected by Miles Forman. In the !lm, convicted felon R.P. McMurphy (Jack Nicholson) istransferred from prison to a psychiatric hospital for observation. As the chief psychiatristsuggests several times through the !lm, it is possible that McMurphy is feigning mentalillness to get out of prison. In the hospital, he stays on a ward with men who have varyingdegrees of disturbance, all ruled over by Nurse Ratched (Louise Fletcher). McMurphy leadsthe men into serious rule-breaking episodes both outside and inside the hospital. After oneepisode, McMurphy is given electroconvulsive therapy (ECT or shock therapy)—depicted aspunishment for his transgressions. At the end of the !lm, one of the other patientscompletes suicide after he is shamed by Nurse Ratched (following a sexual encounter withMcMurphy's girlfriend in a room on the unit). McMurphy attacks and attempts to kill Ratchedand then is taken away. He reappears at the end after having had a lobotomy and issu"ocated in a presumably mercy killing by a Native American character (the Chief) withwhom McMurphy had struck up a friendship.At the time the !lm came out, it was critically acclaimed and won !ve Academy Awards,including best actor (Nicholson), best actress (Fletcher), best director (Forman), best !lm, andbest adapted screenplay (Lawrence Hauben and Bo Goldman). As a number of critics haveobserved, the !lmmakers made choices that rendered the !lm signi!cantly di"erent fromKesey's novel (Garner 2015; Palumbo 1983; Sodowsky and Sodowsky 1991). Kesey had!ctionalized his own experiences working as an orderly in a psychiatric hospital, as well ashis time as an experimental subject in hallucinogenic drug trials in the early 1960s(Dodgson 2013). The novel centered on the perspective of the Chief, while the central focusin the !lm is McMurphy. In addition, the novel employed hallucinogenic scenes and imagery,while the !lm was designed by Czech director Milos Forman in what Jaimey Fisher hasdescribed as a more realistic, documentary style (Fisher 2025).Dean Brooks, the real-life superintendent of the state hospital where Cuckoo's Nest was!lmed, participated in the production, even playing the !lm version of the superintendent(Dr. Spivey). As Brooks explained later to an audience at the Institute on Hospital andCommunity Psychiatry, he viewed the !lm as an important opportunity to open upconversations about psychiatric practice. He did not believe that the !lm was speci!callyanti-psychiatry—he thought that the broader themes of authoritarian repression were moreimportant. Further, he emphasized the choice the !lmmakers made to set the !lm in theearly 1960s, like the book, rather than the present day of psychiatry in 1975. Some withinthe professional audiences where Brooks showed Cuckoo's Nest agreed with him about thegeneralizable nature of the critique of authority. Others, though, worried that audienceswould come away with a negative view of psychiatry (Armstrong 1977). This fear wasparticularly salient regarding the e"orts of social psychiatrists, who were trying to push forreform within the !eld and in society as a whole.2 Social PsychiatrySocial psychiatry emerged in the years after World War II in the wake of growing concernabout the e"ects of the social environment on mental health. Some mental healthprofessionals involved with social psychiatry included psychoanalysts such as WilliamMenninger, as well as social scientists such as psychiatrist-anthropologist AlexanderLeighton. Social psychiatrists de!ned their !eld in a variety of ways, as they acknowledged atthe time (Pepper et al. 1965). Social psychiatry could mean anything from the use of socialscience methods to study populations regarding mental health and illness (Bernard andCrandell 1968; Smith 2023) to the examination of group dynamics to understand mentalprocesses (Redlich and Pepper 1968). While they varied in theoretical approaches, most withthe movement took as a given that larger, state psychiatric hospitals were inherentlyuntherapeutic. Beyond the hospital, some advocates of social psychiatry insisted that since itwas known that social environment—including issues such as poverty and racism—a"ectedthe presence of mental illness, psychiatrists needed to intervene in society itself. Theirarguments were much more than just the observation that social determinants a"ectedhealth. Social psychiatrists wanted to !nd ways to alleviate social ills, including addressinginjustice and inequity.Social psychiatrists in the 1950s and 1960s were vocal in their critiques toward entrenchedpower structures in the !eld, especially the American Psychiatric Association (APA) refusal toaddress social inequalities while its members continued comfortable, o$ce-basedpsychoanalytic practices with a%uent patients. One of the organizations representing socialpsychiatry was the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry (GAP), an activist o"shoot ofthe APA in which members turned their psychiatric expertise toward major social problems(Grob 1986). Albert Deutsch, the journalist and outspoken critic of midcentury psychiatrichospitals, frequently consulted for the GAP and wrote its earliest history (Deutsch 1959).Another organization, the American Orthopsychiatric Association (Ortho), derived itsunusual name from the idea of straightening out mental problems, including the socialelements that led to those problems. Ortho members were enthusiastic about social justiceand insisted that psychiatrists should play a role in improving society as a whole, not justtreating individual patients (Shore and Mannino 1975).Social psychiatrists addressed many of the problematic elements in American psychiatrythat were represented in Cuckoo's Nest. They were generally scathing about the deplorableconditions and lack of treatment in state mental hospitals. They were keenly aware of thee"ects of group dynamics, both positive and negative, in the lives of psychiatric patients.They grappled with the complexities of psychiatric diagnosis and the potential for misuse ofsomatic interventions such as medications and ECT. Some portions of social psychiatryorganizations, especially those directed toward child psychiatry, had signi!cant numbers ofwomen in positions of authority, while most social psychiatry groups were stronglyconcerned about racism.3 The InstitutionOne Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest takes place primarily within a psychiatric institution. Theinside of the mental hospital is bleak. The green walls are faded and unkempt. Sections ofthe ward where McMurphy is housed appear like cages. There is little background music tosoften the harsh, institutional sounds. The clicking heels of doctors and nurses in quietcorridors, as well as the clang of keys and gates, convey the isolation and desolation in whatclearly appears to be a warehouse. The authority !gures who enforce the structures of thehospital are portrayed in rigid, mechanistic terms. McMurphy's chaotic presentationcontrasts with Nurse Ratched's in&exible routines. Ratched attempts to justify her routinesas bene!cial to the patients in giving them structure and predictability, but McMurphy helpsto expose them as arbitrary.Against this backdrop of tension between rigidity and spontaneity, McMurphy becomesaware of the contrast between this kind of institution and a prison as he learns that theprocess for release from the hospital is di"erent. McMurphy tells one of the attendants, whois calling out McMurphy for his rebellious behavior, that after his set sentence he will bereleased. The attendant points out to him that his time in the hospital is dependent onmedical sta" decisions. McMurphy confronts Nurse Ratched about not telling him about thecontingency of his discharge and this leads to a group rebellion against the nurse'sauthority. As Daniel Shaw has pointed out, Cuckoo's Nest echoed many of the concerns aboutpsychiatric institutions that had been raised by French theorist Michel Foucault in his criticalwork, Madness and Civilization. The institution within the !lm was used to not only controlthe physical movements of the inmates but also their emotional expression (Shaw 2017).But even as the !lm implicated psychiatric institutions in social control, it was releaseddecades after social psychiatrists had been raising the alarm about the role of psychiatricinstitutions. By the early 1960s, at the time when Kesey's novel was released, journalists hadbeen publishing exposes for decades on the disreputable conditions of state psychiatrichospitals (Deutsch 1948; Maisel 1946). In 1961, sociologist Erving Go"man produced hisseminal critique of the psychiatric hospital system, calling it a “total institution” that exertedcontrol over every aspect of patients' lives (Go"man 1961). At the time when critics andactivists were publicly pointing out the problems, psychiatrists were also highly critical of theinstitutions. In 1955, the Joint Commission on Mental Illness and Health (JCMIH), anongovernmental investigative body that included members of the APA and the AmericanMedical Association (AMA), studied the many issues of state hospitals. In their 1961 report,Action for Mental Health, the JCMIH called for a shift of patients from hospitals to communitycare (Joint Commission on Mental Illness and Health). Their report stimulated the 1963Community Mental Health Centers Act, signed by President John Kennedy the month beforehis assassination (Grob 1991).Social psychiatrists were at the forefront of the movement of psychiatry out of institutionsand into the community. They were also critical of psychiatric traditions that held that theindividual was the center of intervention. Cornell psychiatrist Thomas Rennie, who beforehis untimely death in 1956 led the Midtown Manhattan study to illuminate the e"ect ofneighborhoods on mental health (Smith 2023), argued that psychiatry should go beyondindividual patients' unconscious con&icts. It was essential, he said, to understand howindividuals interacted with others and how social contexts a"ected mental health. He alsoinsisted on the importance of prevention and said that social scientists would be idealpartners in the work of understanding the social world that a"ected mental health andillness (Rennie 1955). In the early 1960s, many social psychiatrists became excited about thepublication of Action for Mental Health (Pepper and Redlich 1962) and embraced the idea ofworking with patients in their communities rather than as inmates of institutions.Some social psychiatrists, such as Alexander Leighton, were focused primarily on research.Leighton was also an anthropologist who led the Stirling County Study, another explorationof the role of social context and environment on mental health and illness (Smith 2023).Leighton's Program in Social Psychiatry at Cornell, founded in 1958, included social scientistswho explored the presentation and context of illness in a variety of national andinternational settings. Psychiatrists of the time period were quite friendly to social sciencecollaboration. Go"man, in fact, articulated his arguments about the total institution whileworking on a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health (Halliwell 2013).Other social psychiatrists used the broad vision of social environments to advocate forchange. Child psychiatrist Viola Bernard and her colleagues at the Columbia UniversityDivision of Social and Community Psychiatry not only did research, but also changed theirinteractions with the community. In the late 1950s, Bernard's team started the ColumbiaWashington Heights project, in which they studied the patterns around issues of mentalillness and help-seeking in the neighborhoods surrounding the medical center (Kolbet al. 1961). They took their observations farther over the decade of the study and changedadmission processes to the Columbia mental hospital, shifted how they engaged with thecommunity, and started to address some of the community complaints of the time (Kolbet al. 1969).By the early 1970s when the !lm version of Cuckoo's Nest was made, state hospitals werestarting to empty. Although scholars have not reached complete consensus on the precisereason for the decline in hospital populations, some have pointed out the creation of mentalhealth law to provide for legal due process to restrict admission to those who were a dangerto themselves or others (Appelbaum 1994), the growing use of psychiatric medication thatallowed for a decrease in symptoms and thus hastened discharge (Healy 2002), and perhapsmore importantly, the !nancial crisis that led to severely reduced state budgets (Grob andGoldman 2006). With the creation of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965, which by statute couldnot pay for state mental hospitals but could pay for nursing homes, many states shiftedtheir patient populations to places where federal payers could pick up the tab (Grob andGoldman 2006). The state hospital census around the country was su$ciently low thatCuckoo's Nest could be !lmed in an abandoned section of a real mental hospital.As Troy Rondinone has pointed out, the role of !lms about the landscape of psychiatricinstitutions in the 1970s was not to represent new information but rather to provide afolklore framework for ideas of the time. The real tragedy of mental health outside ofCuckoo's Nest by the 1970s was that states were shifting their limited budgets fromtreatment options for individuals with mental illness to enhancing prisons. As Parsons haspointed out, at the same time that institutionalization in mental hospitals was decreasing,incarceration in prisons was increasing. Some of the individuals who were discharged fromhospitals ultimately ended up in prison. But for the most part, the shift from hospitals toprisons marked a change in !scal priority away from treatment of mental illness(Parsons 2018).4 Group DynamicsCuckoo's Nest highlights group interactions of those in the !lm who are identi!ed as mentallyill, especially the structured group therapy controlled by Nurse Ratched, the recreationalbasketball games among the patients in which McMurphy pushes against the rules, and twoepisodes of egregious rule breaking orchestrated by McMurphy. The psychiatrist onlyinterviews McMurphy individually a couple of times in the !lm. For the most part, whatpasses for psychiatric intervention takes place within nurse-led group therapy. NurseRatched's groups repress, repel, and even damage members. In contrast to the rigid andultimately unproductive nurse sessions, the characters' group interactions in play appearmuch more therapeutic. McMurphy repeatedly attempts to engage the Chief duringbasketball games. As the !lm progresses, the Chief appears less withdrawn due to theseencounters. McMurphy's spontaneous rule-breaking episodes also seem to help some of thepatients shake loose their neuroses. As Peter Wuss has pointed out, play within the !lmsetting can help establish empathy for the characters (Wuss 2007). This works to someextent for McMurphy as he teaches some of the other patients to play. Nurse Ratched, ofcourse, shuts down the play.It is clear that the sessions led by Ratched in the !lm are intended to caricatureuntherapeutic interventions. At the same time, though, the group interactions revealinformation about the characters. Ratched openly shames some of the men regarding theirthoughts and feelings. When they are in her group, they turn on one another and displayantagonism rather than support, echoing Ratched's approach. In that setting, McMurphy'srebellion is a healthy refusal to be cowed by an arbitrary authority. At the same time,though, some elements of the group dynamics in the !lm are more complicated. In a centralscene in the !lm, McMurphy incites the men to focus their ire at Ratched for her control oftheir behavior, including their access to cigarettes. One character throws a tantrum, actinglike a child even as he protests that he should not be treated like a child by having hiscigarettes withheld. At the time when Cuckoo's Nest was made, calling for unfetteredcigarette access was a reasonable push against the total institution (Hirshbein 2015), thoughthere was signi!cantly more awareness of the dangers of smoking by the time of the !lm'srelease (Brandt 2007).McMurphy's e"orts to lead the group outside of the hospital are more troubling. He steals abus and a boat on a !shing excursion to which he takes the men from the unit at the mid-point of the !lm. By the end, he smuggles in women and liquor and destroys the livelihoodof the overnight attendant. Some commentators have viewed McMurphy's antics in light ofhis trickster persona seen against the harsh repression of the nurse (Shaw 2017). Othercommentators have been concerned about what appears to be McMurphy's dangerous,antisocial behavior (Sodowsky and Sodowsky 1991). McMurphy's alternatives help to takedown capricious authority, at least for a little while, but are not themselves healthy ortherapeutic. Later generations of Cuckoo's Nest viewers have viewed McMurphy's behaviorsas sociopathic rather than understandably rebellious (Garner 2015).By the time of the !lm release of Cuckoo's Nest, social psychiatrists had been studying groupdynamics for decades. To start, they had explored how military men interacted with oneanother and the e"ect on their mental health. As a military psychiatrist explained in a 1957Walter Reed symposium, their experience during WWII had taught psychiatrists that men incombat settings did better if allowed to stay near their unit, even if they experienced somekind of breakdown due to battle. The military unit o"ered men a kind of therapeuticcommunity (Symposium on Preventive and Social Psychiatry, 15–17 April 1957; Artiss 1963).Overstretched psychiatrists in the 1960s and 1970s valued intentional group work as a wayof extending psychiatric bene!t to more patients. Beyond numbers, though, psychiatristsbegan to appreciate that groups could be therapeutic and that group therapy was anopportunity to put social psychiatry principles into action (Cushman 1995; Leighton 1960).Patient interactions could also provide research data. Even for those in social psychiatry whodid not want to push for major social change, small social interactions o"ered a way to gobeyond individual therapy (Ruesch 1965). Few in the US were willing to go so far as toexplore the anti-hierarchical therapeutic community created by British psychiatrist R.D.Laing (Staub 2011). Some American psychiatrists even insisted that group therapy was, likeindividual therapy, intended to help resolve intrapsychic con&icts for each member of thegroup (Bieber and Bieber 1965). Others, though, suggested that the group dynamics couldyield information not available through individual interactions and could even help with thethorny issue of race relations (Snell 1966).5 Diagnosis and TreatmentDuring a memorable scene in Cuckoo's Nest, the physicians who work at the hospital—several of whom were portrayed by real-life psychiatrists (Armstrong 1977) – debateMcMurphy's diagnosis and whether he should remain at the hospital or be sent back toprison. The medical director raises the question of whether McMurphy is just pretending tobe sick and suggests that they could decide to be done with his charade of illness. The otherphysicians in the room o"er suggestions about what might be wrong with McMurphy, usingjargon that sounds nonsensical even in the context of the !lm, and make the case for tryingto treat him. The !nal word is given to Nurse Ratched, who is at the meeting but not at thetable with the physicians. Her insistence that they should keep McMurphy to try to help himstrongly implies that she wants to use psychiatric power to exert dominance over him. Thephysicians cannot agree on what—if anything—might be wrong with McMurphy's mentalhealth. However, the physicians' lack of clarity does not a"ect Ratched's e"orts to usepsychiatric authority to control McMurphy's behaviors.Psychiatric diagnostic validity was very much in disrepute by the time that the !lm wasreleased. Just a couple of years before, the APA faced public ridicule when it !rst defended—and then voted to remove—the diagnosis of homosexuality from the then-currentpsychiatric diagnostic manual, the DSM-II (Bayer 1987). Even more damning, in 1973psychologist David Rosenhan published an article in Science entitled “On Being Sane inInsane Places” (Rosenhan 1973). In the article, Rosenhan claimed to have sent volunteers toa number of mental hospitals to pretend to be mentally ill. Each volunteer allegedly reportedhearing the word “thud” but denied other symptoms. According to Rosenhan, thesevolunteers were all hospitalized for signi!cant periods of time and given a variety ofdiagnoses, even though they acted normally and denied symptoms once they were in thehospital. Though it appears likely that Rosenhan fabricated at least some of his !ndings(Cahalan 2019), American psychiatrists took this public embarrassment seriously. New YorkState Psychiatric Institute's Robert Spitzer, who had been involved as a consultant with DSM-II, wrote angry responses to Rosenhan's claims (Spitzer 1975, 1976). Spitzer subsequentlyoverhauled the profession's diagnostic manual and was largely responsible for the criteria-based diagnoses in the 1980 publication of DSM-III (Decker 2013).It is impossible to speculate what, if any, diagnosis would apply to McMurphy in the !lm.Some commentators have viewed McMurphy's character as an intentionally sane !gure whocan highlight the insanity of the world of the institution. Forman, the director of the !lm, castwell-known actor Nicholson in the role of McMurphy as a familiar face to further normalizehis character's apparent sanity in the !lm (Sodowsky and Sodowsky 1991). The dichotomy ofsane versus insane, though, is relevant only to the legal system—from which McMurphy'scharacter is seeking refuge in the hospital.To our modern eyes, the lack of a particular diagnosis may make what pass for treatmentchoices in the !lm more problematic, though it may not have made a di"erence for the!lmmakers. In Cuckoo's Nest, McMurphy and the other patients line up to take cups ofmedication dispensed by the nurse. There is no explanation of what the medication is orwhy it is prescribed. There is no discussion in the !lm by the psychiatry team about the useof medications. At best, the medication in the !lm is inconsequential. At worst, it representsan e"ort to use chemical controls on patients to keep them more docile within theinstitutional setting. At one point, McMurphy &ashes his still-unswallowed pill to his fellowpatients to show that he will not comply. The !lm suggests that psychiatric interventionswere casually dispensed and ultimately meaningless.Social psychiatrists were also concerned about the use of medications in psychiatric settings.In the years before the !lm, social psychiatrists had addressed the potential misuse ofmedications, including the possibility that psychiatrists might prescribe to help manage theirown anxieties about patient behaviors rather than to treat patients. The GAP Committee onMental Health Services explained in 1971 that medications should not be given bythemselves without attention to the relationship between the prescriber and patient. At atime when patient to doctor ratios in psychiatric hospitals were absurdly high (the APAstandard was 94 patients to a psychiatrist) (Central Inspection Board 1957), this meant thatmedication use should have been rare. Further, they pointed out the societal risks inwidespread and indiscriminate use of pills. They drew a parallel between the increasing useof prescription drugs in the population and the tendency of young people in America toreach for substances such as alcohol to manage their feelings (Group for the Advancementof Psychiatry 1971).One of the most disturbing elements of the !lm that has endured into contemporary clinicalspaces is the portrayal of ECT. As historian Jonathan Sadowsky has pointed out, the horrorsof ECT conveyed in the !lm have had profound e"ects on both clinicians and potentialpatients over the years (Sadowsky 2017). In the !lm, McMurphy and some of his fellowpatients—the Chief and another patient (Cheswick) who has a behavioral outburst over hisaccess to cigarettes—are given ECT in the immediate aftermath of a melee on the ward.Cheswick struggles before his treatment, but McMurphy is calm as he is ushered into a roomand instructed to lie down on a table. Orderlies hold down his limbs and he is shown asgrimacing and thrashing as the shock is administered. Critics of the Cuckoo's Nest portrayalpointed out that the !lm showed unmodi!ed ECT, administration of the shock without useof anesthesia, which was more common for the time when the !lm was set in 1963(McDonald and Walter 2001). The grimace on McMurphy's face, though, suggests tounfamiliar observers that he could be in pain. A similar illustration of a face grimacing withthe administration of shock was used for a documentary created by the anti-psychiatry,Scientology-backed, Citizens Commission on Human Rights (Citizens Commission on HumanRights, n.d.).Critics of psychiatry were not the only ones concerned about ECT, however. Socialpsychiatrists had raised the question about the potential for misuse of ECT almost twodecades before Cuckoo's Nest was released. In fact, the !rst report generated by the GAP,published in 1947, was on the topic of shock therapy. The GAP concluded that moreresearch was needed to understand what ECT was doing and the seriousness of the sidee"ects. They also advocated for major caution, since “Abuses in the use of electro-shocktherapy are su$ciently widespread and dangerous to justify consideration of a campaign ofprofessional education in the limitations of this technique, and perhaps even to justifyinstituting certain measures of control” (Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry 1947).Regardless of the potential bene!t of the intervention, social psychiatrists viewed groupsand communities as appropriate sites of interaction, rather than what might be physiologicalchanges wrought upon an unconscious patient. Not surprisingly, the GAP was similarlydismayed about the potential for abuse of lobotomy (Group for the Advancement ofPsychiatry 1948).6 White Women and Black MenWhile the superintendent, Dr. Spivey, is nominally in charge of the hospital in Cuckoo's Nest,it is primarily Nurse Ratched, her assistants, and the predominantly Black attendants whokeep order within the institution. As one set of critics pointed out, the attendants are“portrayed as willing, malicious, and sometimes violent agents of Nurse Ratched's will”(Sodowsky and Sodowsky 1991). The White women outside the ward, the two friends ofMcMurphy, play the role of sex objects in the !lm. While White women appear asstereotypes (castrating mother or whore), Black men also appear within racial bounds. Oneof the signals that the !lm is set in 1963 is an audible radio program that describes thebombing of the church in Birmingham, Alabama during the Civil Rights Movement. The mainattendant, who confronts McMurphy about his assumption that he could serve his time inthe hospital and be released when his time was done, is referred to as Washington in the!lm, a stereotypical name for a Black man. The attendants in the !lm generally do thebidding of Ratched, though Washington seems to take particular pleasure in the opportunityto hit McMurphy during con&icts. Another one of the Black attendants is also a stereotype—he is easily convinced by McMurphy to help them break rules when enticed by a bottle ofliquor and a chance for sex with a White woman.As Jennifer Lambe has observed, modern students are much more bothered by the racismwithin the !lm (Lambe 2019), even as it is not clear what, if anything, the !lmmakersintended to convey in their portrayal of race. The racial dynamics around the Chief in the!lm are much less clear than they were in the book, especially since the !lm does not usethe Chief's perspective or give him many opportunities to speak. The issue of gender in the!lm has received more consistent attention over the years. Some commentators viewedNurse Ratched as the epitome of evil (Rondinone 2020). Others noted that she took thebrunt of the criticism for psychiatry as a whole as she is left to manage the unit while themale psychiatrists seldom appear on the unit outside of a crisis. The monstrous power ofthe nurse represented the corruption of the institution as a whole (Walker 2004).Psychoanalytic critics Glen Gabbard and Krin Gabbard have observed that both theinstitution and Ratched act to emasculate the men (Gabbard and Gabbard 1999).The representation in the !lm of White women and Black men served to highlight theproblems of authority within institutions. However, the !lm's caricatures had little to do withthe probing critiques that social psychiatrists were making at the time. First, a signi!cantnumber of women psychiatrists, especially in child psychiatry, were partners in the work ofsocial psychiatry during the decades of its prominence in the profession. Viola Bernard atColumbia was a leader in the GAP and in her own division of community and socialpsychiatry (Doyle 2016). New York psychiatrist Marion Kenworthy was one of the foundingmembers of the GAP, as well as the American Academy of Child Psychiatry. In 1959, shebecame the !rst woman to head the American Psychoanalytic Association (Sperling 1996).Most of the women leaders in social psychiatry were White, though Jeanne Spurlock becamenot only a pioneering Black woman leader at Meharry Medical School but also a deputydirector at the APA in 1974 (“Psychiatrist and Advocate Jeanne M. Spurlock” 1999). Bernard,Kenworthy, Spurlock, and others wielded authority in their own right. Women didlegitimately lead in psychiatric spaces and organizations at the time.Social psychiatrists were even more engaged with the problem of racism. Bernard and hercolleagues on the Committee on Social Issues in the GAP prepared a report on thepsychiatric consequences of school desegregation. Their report was on the side of theintegrationists and the thrust of their report was that those who still believed in racialsegregation needed to adjust their attitudes and behaviors (Group for the Advancement ofPsychiatry 1957). Bernard also worked at the Northside Clinic, a mental health clinic inHarlem, where she collaborated with Black psychologists Kenneth Clark and Mamie Clark(Doyle 2016; Markowitz and Rosner 1996). Most social psychiatrists supported the CivilRights Movement. In 1964, Ortho issued a statement in support of desegregation andintegration, emphasizing the mental health consequences of discrimination. Ortho membersalso pointed out that their organization had been integrated since its founding in 1924(Corman et al. 1964).Social psychiatrists were not just issuing statements on this topic. The Joint Commission onthe Mental Health of Children (JCMHC), a multidisciplinary nongovernmental organizationwhose members worked between 1965 and 1970, was dominated by social psychiatryperspectives. Initiated as a follow up to the JCMIH (which had not included children), theJCMHC mapped out national policy action to address major social inequities, includingpoverty and racism (Joint Commission on Mental Health of Children 1970). As historianMichal Raz has pointed out, some of the attention to social circumstances pathologized thepoor (Raz 2013). But the JCMHC, which called for a universal basic income among otherinterventions, insisted on major social changes. JCMHC participants argued that nationalleaders needed to address the problems of systemic racism to improve mental health foreveryone.By the late 1960s and into the 1970s, a growing number of Black psychiatrists were speakingup about the need to incorporate group, neighborhood, and community perspectives inmental health. Black psychiatrist Chester Pierce declared in 1969 that racism was itself amental illness, that anyone who believed that skin color meant anything about a person'sabilities was delusional (Pierce 1969a). Pierce and others insisted that White social scientistshad developed erroneous and damaging ideas about what was normal in Black communitiesbecause they were blinded by their assumptions. Pierce and others argued that what wasneeded were more Black professionals and more research into real problems with the Blackcommunity (Willie et al. 1973). Black physicians further complained that Black patients wereless likely to be treated by the very small number of Black psychiatrists in the country. Theywere more likely to be put into state hospitals and given coercive treatments to keep themin line (Douglass 1965). Black psychiatrists also had to contend with the psychologicaldamage to Black communities of centuries of oppression and ongoing racial discrimination(Pinderhughes 1964). These were not academic nor individual problems. They requiredsocial solutions.By the 1970s when Cuckoo's Nest was released, Americans were frequently exposed toimages of violence involving Black people. In the !lm, the scenes where the angry Blackattendant takes the opportunity to punch a White man during a con&ict on the unit recalledthe racial turmoil from just a few years before. In the aftermath of race rebellions (termedriots by White authorities), Black communities faced especially harsh backlash (Hinton 2021).Black psychiatrists pointed out that Black people were oppressed and demoralized, and so itmade sense that they would lash out at yet more e"orts to keep them in line (Pierce 1969b).The !lm does not resolve the problem of the night attendant who loses his job because ofMcMurphy. The Black men do not achieve liberation in the !lm. For social psychiatry, too,the problems of enduring racism were ultimately left unresolved.7 Anti-Psychiatry AgainWith the hindsight a"orded by the !ve decades since the making of One Flew Over theCuckoo's Nest, the timing of the !lm seems unfortunate in terms of the causes espoused bysocial psychiatry. Cuckoo's Nest represented a number of the issues raised by critics ofpsychiatry of the time, especially the authoritarian and untherapeutic nature of the hospitaland the critique of what passed for treatment. At the same time, though, anti-psychiatryactivists' success in turning public opinion away from psychiatry helped to reinforce themore conservative elements within the psychiatric profession. On 10 November 1975, a littleover a week before Cuckoo's Nest was released in theaters, University of Kentucky psychiatrychair Arnold Ludwig published an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Associationin which he listed the many criticisms of the !eld of psychiatry, including problems withdiagnosis, legal status of hospitalization, the failure of the !eld to address social problems,and the question of the legitimacy of the profession itself. Ludwig complained that, “Theseattacks cannot be simply dismissed as unreasonable, irrational, and prejudicial attitudes ofcritics; they are symptomatic of the particular vulnerability of modern-day psychiatry to suchcharges” (1975, 603). Ludwig insisted that the answer was for psychiatrists to stop talkingabout such unscienti!c concepts as social environment and focus on mental illness as amedical condition (Ludwig 1975).By the late 1970s and early 1980s, social psychiatry was on the decline within the profession.Spitzer was promoting DSM-III as the answer to the problem of chaos and disagreementabout diagnosis within psychiatry (Kirk and Kutchins 1992). Enthusiasts aboutpharmaceutical products wielded more power within the profession (Healy 2002). Whilesocial psychiatrists over previous decades had insisted that the entirety of the professionhad an obligation to at least understand, if not intervene in, the issues of patients' socialworlds, by the late 1970s social psychiatry was being downgraded to just anotherperspective on patient care (Brody 1978). In 1978, University of Rochester psychiatristGeorge Engel described what he called the biopsychosocial formulation, in which the socialview was limited to a general understanding of how individual patients' social circumstancesa"ected their presentation and treatment in a health care setting (Engel 1978).Meanwhile, the activist work within social psychiatry—especially addressing the issues ofcommunity structure, poverty, and racism—went into rapid decline. Part of this certainly wasthe retreat of the federal government, !rst under the administration of Richard Nixon andthen dramatically with the election of President Ronald Reagan (Mechanic and Grob 2006).The !lm version of Cuckoo's Nest most certainly did not cause changes in federal policy, but itre&ected the simplistic solutions embraced by policy makers during this time period. Ifpsychiatric institutions were warehouses, it was easy—and economical—to close them. Butdespite the e"orts of anti-psychiatry advocates and the expectation of state governments,closing state mental hospitals did not make mental illness go away.This is not to say that popular media portrayals of the limitations of medicine and psychiatryare not valuable. The challenge in the history of psychiatry has been the assumption thatpsychiatric power and authority align with other kinds of repressive powers. In the case ofanti-psychiatry e"orts in the 1970s in particular, an e"ort to liberate people from repressiveregimes had the unintended consequence of reinforcing a medical model of mental illness.Contemporary critics of psychiatry have taken issue with psychiatry's failure to addresssocial context and the tendency of the profession to medicalize everyday life (Horwitz 2002;Lane 2007; Whitaker and Cosgrove 2015).As with the aftermath of the Cuckoo's Nest critique of psychiatry, contemporary criticisms arein danger of being hijacked by a further right-wing turn in American health policy. The healthleadership within the current American administration is listening to critiques aboutreductionism in the treatment of mental illness and suggesting that people should be freefrom many psychiatric interventions. But liberating Americans from pharmaceuticals will notmake mental illness go away, any more than closing hundreds of thousands of statepsychiatric hospital beds did. At the same time that they are having conversations aboutreducing the use of psychiatric diagnoses and medications in the guise of helping mentalhealth, the administration's actions in worsening access to food assistance and healthinsurance, as well as the shift of resources from the poor to the wealthy, are unquestionablyworsening mental health. Liberation in the area of mental health and illness is criticallyimportant—too many people are too impaired to achieve or acquire safety and lifesatisfaction. However, this liberation needs to include real attention to the social world.Food, clothing, shelter, education, and employment are all issues that can and should beidenti!ed as critical for psychiatry and medicine to address. Otherwise, we may !ndourselves liberated from the limited options we have now to help people in distress.FundingThe author has nothing to report.
Early ViewOnline Version of Recordbefore inclusion in an issueReferencesRelatedInformationRecommended
Journal of Avian BiologyFrontiers in Ecology and the Environment
Journal of Avian BiologyMultiparasitism and repeated parasitismby the great spotted cuckoo Clamatorglandarius on its main host, the magpiePica pica: e!ects on reproductive success,nest desertion and nest predationManuel Soler, Tomás Pérez-Contreras, Francisco Ruiz-RayaThree species of birds in one nestYiguo Hou, Lei WangE!ect of Japanese lesser sparrowhawksAccipiter gularis on the nest site selectionof azure-winged magpies Cyanopica cyanathrough their nest defending behaviorMutsuyuki UetaFifty Years of One Flew Over the Cuckoo'sNest: A Qualitative Exploration of MentalHealth Sta!'s PerspectivesJohn Goodwin, Katerina Drakos SECTIONS
PDFCITETOOLSSHARE
Search
Login / Register
Download PDFThe author has nothing to report.Ethics StatementThe author has nothing to report.Data Availability StatementData sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed duringthe current study.References
Have questions about this content? Try AI Companion.
