BJenningsBiopowerandtheLiberationistRomance2010
In repo

16 HASTINGS CENTER REPORT July-August 2010Bioethics lives in the shadow of great structures and
practices of power, and yet, it has not been notable for its contributions to an understanding of pow -
er.
1 Indeed, the narrative that bioethics has fashioned for
itself has been mainly a liberationist romance: a quest narrative in which the individual, seeking autonomy, struggles against limitations, constraints, and inhibitions imposed by forces (rules, roles, institutions, interference by others, customs, traditions) from the outside.
Today this liberationist romance is being challenged,
revised, and deepened from at least two angles. One, which might be referred to as “deontological human-ism,” refines our comprehension of individual freedom and dignity beyond minimalist notions of self-reliance and freedom from others’ interference.
2 A second per -
spective, which offers a critical deconstruction of what it calls “biopolitics” and “biopower,” provides a more overtly political and systemic narrative of ethics in the face of power.
From the point of view of these emerging critiques,
biotechnology’s intervention into the minds and bodies of human beings threatens our rights, dignity, equality, and respect for each other. It also erodes the foundations of personhood, agency, and individual identity upon which these ideals have been built. This is because, al -
though ostensibly designed to benefit human subjects, biotechnology often is an objectifying and reductionis -
tic form of power that erodes self (the “I” as a unique subject). Individuated subjects become fungible parts, edited transcripts, messages written in normal or mis -
taken codes (i.e., “healthy” people or people with ge -
netic defects). Similarly, biopower and biotechnology alter the liberal, individualist notion of the political and moral community. The state is understood not as a social contract of mutual self-interest and cooperation among free and equal natural persons, but as a structure of pro -
tection designed to preserve the life of functional, pro -
ductive, and efficient bodies, and to exclude dangerous, defective, or aberrant life.
The critique of biopower has been developing for sev -
eral decades. An early focus, inspired by Foucault’s work and “labeling theory” in sociology, was on psychiatry and psychiatric institutions. In recent years, the biopower critique has broadened as genetic engineering and bio -
technology have developed. From this point of view, it is interesting to compare what might be seen as an early novel of biopower with a more contemporary treatment. I know of no better examples for this purpose than Ken Kesey’s One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest and Kazuo Ishig -
uro’s Never Let Me Go .
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest calls us to rethink
conventional assumptions about normalcy, mental ill -
ness, freedom, therapy, and the manifestation of power in institutional culture and in therapeutic discourses of professional expertise. Its setting is a closed psychiatric hospital ward; its focus is the discourse of psychiatry and psychiatric nursing. The narrative voice is that of Chief Bromden, a huge Native American whose paranoia leads him to see himself as small and weak, and whose survival strategy is to become socially invisible by pretending to be deaf and dumb. Bromden sees that the power of the mental health care system is ubiquitously entrapping—just another manifestation of the power system of the broader society, or what the deconstructionists would call the biopolitical state. This power works like a fog; it is both intangible and blinding. If you can see it, you are Essays
Biopower and the
Liberationist Romance
BY BRUCE JENNINGSIn the spirit of summer, and especially summer reading, we asked a few well-
read writers for an essay on a book or books exploring bioethics issues through
story. The result is a compelling look at how we face our fears and hopes about
biotechnology and medicine. A reading list appears at the end.
Bruce Jennings, “Biopower and the Liberationist Romance,” Hastings Cen -
ter Report 40, no. 4 (2010): 16-20.
© 2010 The Hastings Center. Permission is required to reprint.
July-August 2010 HASTINGS CENTER REPORT 17diagnosable within its categories and may be singled out for
special measures of control.
At the center of the struggle against power in Cuckoo’s Nest
is Randle P . McMurphy, a charming, rough-hewn ne’er-do-well who lives largely by impulse. He finds rules, schedules, and social structures of all kinds overly confining. He vis-
cerally rejects authority and proceeds to violate, subvert, and
outwit those who would confine him and his appetites in any way. By turns irresponsible and well-meaning, selfishly preda -
tory and kind-hearted, he undergoes something of a moral education and transformation as the novel progresses.
When McMurphy enters the world of the locked ward,
he enters a “total institution” unlike any he has encountered
before.
4 He has no idea of
how entangling the coils of what he has stumbled into
can be. His nemesis is Nurse Ratched (the “Big Nurse,” as the physically much larger
narrator, Chief Bromden,
calls her), who exercises au -
tocratic control of the ward.
Once he recognizes that he
will get nowhere by conning her with false subservience, McMurphy adopts a politi -
cal strategy—he attempts to ferment resistance among the other inmates, most of whom
he believes have psychologi -
cal problems and symptoms
not because they are really ill, but because they are being
cowed and repressed by Nurse
Ratched’s regime. They are es-sentially sane men dwelling in
a structurally insane place.
If Nurse Ratched is blinded by her tendency to see psycho -
pathology wherever there is spontaneity and independence,
McMurphy is equally blinded by his inability to fathom
deep-seated problems and true mental illness. Ratched’s
influence induces passivity and helplessness; McMurphy’s prompts action, taking risks, and seeking out novel emotional
experiences. Both are careless about—if not indifferent to—
the actual effect that their “therapies” have on others. To be sure, McMurphy’s goal is to rehumanize by struggling against the dehumanizing power of the ward. One of the inmates,
recognizing this, says to McMurphy: “They’ve still got their
problems, just like all of us. They’re still sick men in lots of ways. But at least there’s that: they are sick men now. No more
rabbits, Mack. Maybe they can be well men someday. I can’t say” (p. 257). However, in the case of Billy Bibbit, a deeply troubled young man with enormous guilt, McMurphy’s en -
couragement tragically misfires.
The final confrontation occurs when McMurphy con-
trives, with the help of an alienated night watchman, to throw an after-hours party on the ward, complete with li -
quor and two prostitutes. One of these women and Billy have sexual relations during the evening. Arriving early the next morning, Nurse Ratched finds the ward in disarray and Billy in flagrante. She proceeds to shame and threaten Billy so se -
verely (including saying that she will disclose his behavior to his mother—Billy’s Achilles heel) that he later commits sui-cide. In response to this, McMurphy assaults Nurse Ratched,
nearly strangling her. That is the excuse that the system needs
to deal with McMurphy once and for all. He is labeled a dan -
gerous psychopath and lobotomized. A few moments before McMurphy attacks the Big Nurse, Chief Bromden sums up
the larger context of the confrontation with power on the
ward:
I looked at McMurphy out
of the corner of my eye.
. . . He was in his chair in the corner, resting a second be -
fore he came out for the next round—in a long line of next rounds. The thing he was fighting, you couldn’t whip it for good. All you could do was keep on whipping it, till you couldn’t come out any more and somebody else had to take your place. (p. 265)
Still, McMurphy is not a
hero, and Ratched is not the
villain. Setting up an opposi -
tion between good and evil
does not give an adequate un -
derstanding of either power
or the struggle against it.
The power embodied in the
ward is not fully under the control of any character, includ-
ing Nurse Ratched. The overriding factor here is the logic
of control, and biopower trumps professional nursing ethics, as it were, as Nurse Ratched is impelled by the need to pre -
serve the order and power of the institutional world, rather
than to honor her ethical commitment to the well-being and
health of her patients. And again, the real threat to her con -
trol—and to the logic of biopower operating through her—is
not the ethical principle of patient autonomy and rights, it is
McMurphy’s sheer life-force, which neither the daily indigni -
ties of the ward’s routines nor the electroshock treatments he
receives can suppress. Only a surgical lobotomy can quell it.
Where do we draw the line between ethically grounded
therapy, on the one hand, and domination through the ex -
ercise of power, on the other? If we remain within the thera -
peutic frame—which is the perspective that has tended to predominate in medical ethics—psychiatry has been one area
of medicine where the bioethical balance between respect for
autonomy and beneficence has been especially difficult to The bioethics narrative has
been mainly a liberationist
romance: a quest in which
the individual, seeking
autonomy, struggles against
outside forces. T oday this is
being challenged, revised,
and deepened.
18 HASTINGS CENTER REPORT July-August 2010strike.5 To be sure, the therapeutic framework is concerned
with power, but primarily the interpersonal power at work
in the relationship between physician and patient. This over -
looks what might be called “institutional” or “structural”
power. This kind of power operates in the background, grow -
ing out of the ways in which bodies of knowledge are codified
and made accessible (the work of Foucault has emphasized
this aspect) and the ways in which social rules, roles, and rela -
tionships are organized over time into institutions (the work
of Goffman has emphasized this aspect). Power is not some -
thing extrinsic that experts or institutions wield; it is inherent
in and constitutive of scientific knowledge and social institu -
tions as such.6
If Kesey’s concern is the
exercise of power in the face
of recalcitrant mind and un -
ruly impulse, Kazuo Ishiguro,
in his novel Never Let Me Go,
is concerned with the exercise
of biopower in the face of ag -
ing bodies and failing organs.
The book’s setting is an imag -
ined future regime of exten -
sive organ procurement and transplantation, rationalized and made effective through
human cloning. The narrator
of Cuckoo’s Nest is a paranoid
schizophrenic—or perhaps he
is only pretending to be to es -
cape the power world around
him. Double perspectives of this kind allow Kesey to use
irony not for the sake of de -
tachment, but for the sake of
moral outrage. Never Let Me Go is quite different in rhetoric
and tone. The story is presented through the eyes of a quite ordinary and altogether conforming young woman, Kathy H., who is among the class of human clones created to serve as organ “donors” and “carers.” Carers are clones who, before
they become donors themselves, are assigned to care for those
in the donor phase of their lives as they are gradually killed (“completed”) by repeated organ retrievals.
Ishiguro’s narrative device allows him to insinuate this fu -
ture system of biopower in faint outline, instead of describing it directly and in narrative detail as a typical work of science fiction would do.
7 By adopting the perspective of one of the
new class of human beings created by this system, and by
tracing her gradually dawning awareness of her status and
function in the world, Ishiguro explores ambivalence, defen -
sive denial, and the complex process of identity formation. Kathy H. and her peers only gradually perceive that they are
not a fortunate few, but members of what is, in reality, a stig -
matized and oppressed group—a synthetic caste unable to
propagate, educated to be passive and accepting of their role,
and lacking any life-plan or future possibilities beyond that. Cuckoo’s Nest is a study in the development of a political con -
sciousness of rebellion and, to some degree, solidarity with
other powerless individuals. Like Huck Finn, Chief Bromden
escapes at the close of the novel and heads west toward a new
life of freedom. By contrast, Never Let Me Go is a coming-of-
age novel with characters for whom coming of age ultimately
has little point. Its model is the genre of English boarding-
school fiction—think Goodbye, Mr. Chips —but the boarding
school for clone children, Hailsham, is as closed and narrowly bounded a space as Nurse Ratched’s locked psychiatric ward,
albeit with a different emotional register.
The ward is a place people want to escape from but are
(with the exception of McMurphy) afraid to; Hailsham is a
place where no one wants to
leave, but everyone is forced out of when their time comes to be of “service.” To be in the
ward is to be cut off from the
normal world outside, but at the price of loss of authentic
mind (and human identity).
To be a graduate of Hailsham is to be thrust into a world of new normalcy in which the
price is loss of body, one organ
at a time. Ishiguro’s critique of this new normalcy—this soci -
ety made “healthier” through the biotechnological inter -
section of organ transplan -
tation and artificial human
reproduction—is understated
compared with Kesey’s social criticism. (Indeed, Ishiguro is
much the more subtle novel -
ist of the two.) But it is no less pointed and disturbing. The
moral tension of Ishiguro’s novel resides both in questions about the nature of this organ replacement regime and in the
tension between the individual senses of self-identity and self-
worth of human beings who see themselves as persons, on the
one hand, and the reality of a system and situation of power
that uses them merely as bodies, on the other.
By only slowly and indirectly permitting the reality of the
biopolitical system to emerge, Ishiguro is able to explore a
question that has been central to the bioethics debate con -
cerning the (as yet speculative) future of human cloning. What would it feel like to be a clone? What would it do to one’s sense of personhood, moral worth, and self-esteem to
know that you were made, not begotten—created strategical -
ly for an overtly instrumental purpose? The answers are not
straightforward. The Hailsham children rationalize the situa -
tion, neutralizing the implications of the small bits and pieces
of the truth that they are told by the “guardians” (teachers at
the school) or that they come to know by inference or rumor.
As young adults, they struggle more as they move toward
clarity and confrontation with the meaning of their situation, Where do we draw the line
between ethically grounded
therapy and domination?
Power is not something
extrinsic that experts wield,
but inherent in scientific
knowledge and institutions.
July-August 2010 HASTINGS CENTER REPORT 19but they are not necessarily inclined to rebel. At a climatic
moment in the novel, one of the clones, Ruth, realizes what
the place of her kind in the society really is, and this aware -
ness profoundly challenges her sense of self and world. Yet
her anger quickly dies, and she goes on to pursue her duty as a donor until she is completed. Indeed, Ishiguro turns the
tables on the question. He explores the process by which a
biopower regime could manipulate the clones into develop -
ing a sense of moral responsibility for and of moral calling to
serve the recipients of their organs.
8 This sense of responsibil -
ity is based at least in part on deception. It is also fostered through emotional support during childhood, which allows a
sense of conscience and empathy to develop. But at best this is a thin palliative in the midst of what is finally revealed to the narrator and her friends to be a harsh, bigoted system that
wields an overwhelming social and emotional power.
Near the end of the book, Kathy H. and some friends,
now adults and about to begin their donations, locate the former head of Hailsham, Miss Emily. She reveals to them
(and to the reader) for the first time the scope and logic of the biopower that has come to dominate their society:
when the great breakthroughs in science followed one after
the other so rapidly, there wasn’t time to take stock, to ask the sensible questions. Suddenly there were all these new possibilities laid before us, all these ways to cure so many previously incurable conditions. This is what the world no -
ticed the most, wanted the most. And for a long time, peo-ple preferred to believe these organs appeared from nowhere . . . by the time they came to consider just how you were reared, whether you should have been brought into exis -
tence at all, well by then it is was too late. There was no way to reverse the process. How can you ask a world that has come to regard cancer as curable, how can you ask such a world to put away that cure, to go back to the dark days? . . . So for a long time you were kept in the shadows, and people did their best not to think about you. And if they did, they tried to convince themselves you weren’t really like us. That
you were less than human, so it didn’t matter. (p. 2 62-63)
Neither Cuckoo’s Nest nor Never Let Me Go provides us
with a scheme for taming or resisting biopower; neither even
offers anything like a politics to counter the current momen -
tum to extend the therapeutic ever more deeply into the body
and the mind. But both do offer essential reminders about how to assert and how to conserve human meaning. Kesey
reminds us of the enduring historical recurrence of rebellion,
the fact that there will always arise what Thomas Hobbes called a “stubbornness of passion” to weaken the edifice of
the biopolitical Leviathan state.
9 In this regard I suggest that
Cuckoo’s Nest be read against the philosophical backdrop of
Albert Camus’ The Rebel , a neglected, now all-but-forgotten
work that is due for rediscovery.10
Ishiguro leaves us with reformers who have no more rounds
left in them. His novel has no figure of freedom lighting out for the territories. His reminder is of a different sort, one that reflects a social critic like George Orwell.
11 Ishiguro reminds
us of the terrible cost of dehumanization and oppression that all of us, not only those who are oppressed, must pay. Like
Orwell, he knows that when meanings disappear from our languages of self-understanding and social construction, then our capacity to think, to act, and even to feel in ways linked to
those meanings disappears as well. Ishiguro gives us a world
that his moral gaze does not so much condemn as reveal to be deeply wounded and impaired. Concepts like student, guard -
ian, giving, caring, service, possibility, completion, holding on, and letting go are all turned inside out, rendered corrupt by euphemism and double entendre. The recipients of body parts from the stockroom of the donor caste in this society
gain enhanced health at the price of emaciated meaning.
They may live longer thanks to their biopower, but they will not humanly prosper.
1. R.C. Fox and J. Swazey, Observing Bioethics (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2008).
2. L.R. Kass, Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity: The Challenge
for Bioethics (San Francisco, Calif.: Encounter Books, 2002); J. Haber -
mas, The Future of Human Nature (Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press,
2003); President’s Council on Bioethics, Human Cloning and Human
Dignity (New York: Public Affairs, 2002); M. Sandel, The Case Against
Perfection: Ethics in the Age of Genetic Engineering (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2007); F . Fukuyama, Our Posthuman Future:
Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution (New York: Farrar, Straus,
and Giroux, 2002); L.R. Kass and J.Q. Wilson, The Ethics of Human
Cloning (Washington, D.C.: AEI Press, 1998); C.S. Lewis, The Aboli -
tion of Man , rev. ed. (1947; repr., New York: Macmillan, 1955); C.G.
Mitchell, E.D. Pellegrino, J.B. Elshtain, et al., Biotechnology and the
Human Good (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2007);
M.C. Nussbaum and C. Sunstein, eds., Clones and Clones: Facts and
Fantasies about Human Cloning (New York: W.W. Norton, 1998).
3. M. Foucault, History of Madness (New York: Rutledge, 2009) and
The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collège de France 1978–1979
(New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2008); N. Rose, The Politics of Life
Itself: Biomedicine, Power, and Subjectivity in the Twenty-First Century
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2006); G. Agamben,
Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life (Stanford, Conn.: Stanford
University Press, 1998); R. Esposito, Bios: Biopolitics and Philosophy
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008).
4. E. Goffman, Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Pa -
tients and Other Inmates (Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1961).
5. C.M. Culver and B. Gert, Philosophy and Medicine: Conceptual
and Ethical Issues in Medicine and Psychiatry (New York: Oxford Uni -
versity Press, 1982).
6. D.L. Rosenhan, “On Being Sane in Insane Places,” in T.J. Scheff,
ed., Labeling Madness (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1975),
54-74; R. Bayer, Homosexuality and American Psychiatry (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1987); S. Bloch and P . Reddaway, Psy-
chiatric T error (New York: Basic Books, 1977).
7. See A. Desai, “A Shadow World,” New York Review of Books ,
September 22, 2005, available at http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2005/sep/22/a-shadow-world/?pagination=false.
8. This involves the transformation of a role defined by institutional
power into a moral aspect of self-identity and agency. A similar attitude has been observed on the part of surrogate mothers in Israel, who liken
themselves to soldiers on a mission. See E. Teman, Birthing A Mother:
The Surrogate Body and the Pregnant Self (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 2010).
9. T. Hobbes, Leviathan pt 1, ch. 15, (Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell,
1946), 99.
20 HASTINGS CENTER REPORT July-August 201010. A. Camus, The Rebel: An Essay on Man in Revolt (New York:
Vintage Books, 1956).
11. G. Orwell, Nineteen Eighty Four (New York: New American Li -
brary, 1962), and “The Politics of the English Language,” in Collected
Essays (London, U.K.: Secker and Warburg, 1961).
If you travel through airports, you can’t help but notice it.
Jodi Picoult’s novels are everywhere. From Charlotte to
Kansas City to Los Angeles, airport bookstores are consis -
tently stocked with three or four or more of her most recent
heavy volumes of fiction. Read one and you might mutter that it seems designed for a relatively mindless flight from
one coast to the other. Read several and you might agree with
National Public Radio’s disparaging view that the books are “lurid tales of family strife . . . garnished heavily with medical
jargon, legalese, and a punitive finger pointed at a mother.”
It’s not hard to find negative comments about Picoult’s
novels. Janet Maslin, writing for the New York Times , refers to
them as “tear-jerker(s) on authorial autopilot,” long-winded, perfunctory, and vapid. One blogger echoes others in de -
claring that reading a Picoult novel is like watching a train
wreck: painful, but interesting to watch. Even so, her books
are perennial bestsellers, right up there with those of Stephen
King and Mary Higgins Clark. Published in more than forty languages, her last six books have sold more than five million copies in the United States alone. At age forty-two, she’s writ -
ten sixteen novels, continuing a steady pace of writing one a year. Many readers opine that Picoult couldn’t have broken a sweat writing her most recent book, House Rules .Clearly, Picoult has found a formula that works. T ragedy
sparks a family drama. The chapters are narrated through separate viewpoints, each with a font change to distinguish between the different voices of characters. The characters
themselves are somewhat admirable, somewhat despicable.
In the end, they always suffer an alarming plot twist.
Contrived and emotionally manipulative, the stories nev-
ertheless connect effectively with readers. Picoult’s prickly
topics have been plucked right from current headlines and
talk shows: transplant ethics, stem cell research, teen suicide, genetic disease, incest, euthanasia, and abandonment. Sub -
plots meant to reverberate with the main themes of identity, regret, hope, and moral choice weave into the main narrative through intrusive flashbacks and disconnected digressions. Her books could be substantially improved by cutting half
their length.
At her best, Picoult writes about the imperiled children of
flawed middle-class parents. As if it is not enough that these children are saddled with parents who both care for them
deeply and fail them miserably, the children are also inevita -
bly afflicted with a chronic or genetic disease from which they cannot be rescued. Faced with tragic choices, the mothers,
in particular, unerringly make the wrong choice and create
a new, worse tragedy for the child and the entire family. No single horror is sufficient. Perhaps it is no coincidence that
these books sell best in airports, to people who probably wor -
ry about whether they are spending enough time with their
children. Although her stories are imbued with an almost frenzied worry about children, taking care of these vulnerable
victims seems to be more than ordinary parents can handle.
All that said, Picoult’s plots manage to raise philosophic
questions about serious bioethical issues and moral choices. In My Sister’s Keeper , published in 2004, Anna Fitzgerald was
conceived out of her parents’ desperation to have a perfect
genetic match to keep alive her leukemia-afflicted sister, Kate. From infancy, Anna has donated compatible fluids and body
parts to her sibling. Now thirteen, Anna resists giving up a
kidney when Kate needs one. When Anna sues for medical emancipation so that she—not her mother—can make deci -
sions about her body, the family begins to unravel. Anger, hope, and despair alternate throughout the novel’s pages. Is it right to use one child as the means to save another? What should be the limits to a parent’s rights over decisions about
a child’s body?
Handle with Care , published in 2009, delivers another
family in turmoil over decisions about a child’s illness. Five-year-old Willow was born with brittle bone disease, a genetic
imperfection that leaves her vulnerable to hundreds of bro-ken bones as she grows. When her mother decides to sue her obstetrician—also her best friend—for wrongful birth in
order to win a settlement that will pay for Willow’s needs,
the already stressed family threatens to crumble. Arguing the case requires the parents to claim that they would have ter -
minated the pregnancy had they known Willow’s condition early enough. Faced with the knowledge that a fetus will be disabled, is it right for a parent to terminate the pregnancy? BY MARTHA MONTELLOMiddlebrow Medical
Ethics
Martha Montello, “Middlebrow Medical Ethics,” Hastings Center Report 40, no.
4 (2010): 20-22.
