Prisoners_Craft_Article
In repo

Subscribe
Keller Dover (Hugh Jackman), the father of one of the two missing girls, questions Loki about the investigation.HISTORICALFEBRUARY 7,2023Beyond the Law: PrisonersRoger Deakins, ASC, BSC details his lighting approach to thisdisturbing police procedural with compelling plot twists.By David E. WilliamsUnit photography by Wilson WebbSet in an unassuming suburbia, Denis Villeneuve’s dramaPrisoners begins as two neighboring families convene tocelebrate Thanksgiving. After two of their young daughtersvanish without a trace, a tenuous string of clues and franticdesperation leads one father, Keller Dover (Hugh Jackman), tostep well outside the law as he tracks, captures andimprisons the man he believes responsible, Alex Jones (PaulDano). Meanwhile, the police investigation, led by Det. Loki(Jake Gyllenhaal), is uncovering a conspiracy involving childabductions that have taken place over decades.“I heard Denis was doing this movie and got the script,which was dense and had a lot of characters, and, to behonest, Gothic elements that I thought went too far.”— Roger Deakins, ASC, BSC
Prisoners cinematographer Roger Deakins, ASC, BSC says anumber of elements in the story struck him as timely, “theissue of torture among them,” and that he was also attractedto the project by its emphasis on character and performance.“The dramatic success of Prisoners rests on the acting,” hesays.He had also been impressed by Villeneuve’s last feature,Incendies [2010], and was keen to collaborate with thedirector. “I heard Denis was doing this movie and got thescript, which was dense and had a lot of characters, and, tobe honest, Gothic elements that I thought went too far. Iwasn’t interested in that genre, but it turned out that Deniswasn’t, either. We did end up shooting the script, but it wasalways his intention that the final cut of the film wouldn’tfeature those elements.”Prisoners unfolds mainly through the perspectives of Doverand Loki as their respective investigations progress. “Denisand I talked at length about how to ground the movie in thosetwo perspectives, but we didn’t want to do it in an effects-yway,” Deakins says. “For a while, we considered shooting thewhole film handheld to give it a slightly raw feel, but thatdidn’t feel right. It’s a dramatic story, not documentaryrealism. Also, there was a danger of some of the Gothicelements being kind of over-the-top, and we wanted to playthose down, not amplify them. So, in the end, we chose a veryrestrained, matter-of-fact style of camerawork. We didn’t needthe camera to punctuate the suspense, because the suspenseis there in the story and the characters.
Villeneuve watches as Deakins takes the wheels for a remote-head shot.“I guess more and more, I want to do less and less with thecamera. Sometimes, well, we do too much.”The subtle visual style is in some ways reminiscent ofDeakins’ work on another, very different police procedural,Fargo (AC March ’96). “Denis and I did actually talk aboutFargo, mostly about that sort of restraint,” thecinematographer reports. “There are some sequences inPrisoners that we did handheld, but we became aware as wegot into it that handheld didn’t work for this story. It’s kind ofinteresting that we settled on this almost clinical approach tothe camera. A number of people call it ‘classical,’ or even ‘old-fashioned.’ Some people think a handheld camera, lots ofaction, and zooming in and out and finding focus as you golooks ‘modern.’ To me, that’s ridiculous, and I hate that kindof look.”Instead, the sober camerawork in Prisoners draws the viewerinto the drama’s labyrinth of emotions. This is perhaps bestillustrated by a sequence in which Dover ruthlesslyinterrogates Jones in the confines of a small, dingy bathroom,where he has chained Jones to a radiator. As his friend andfellow parent (played by Terrence Howard) looks on, horrifiedyet hopeful for information about his own missing daughter,Dover beats Jones to a bloody pulp. “It’s interesting becauseyou don’t actually see a lot of the violence,” says Deakins.“So much of it is implied, in part by how long he keeps Jonescaptive. Somehow, you can understand why Dover is doingwhat he’s doing, but he does cross a line, and it puts theviewer on the spot: What would you do? Is this justifiable?
Dover confronts Alex Jones (Paul Dano), the man he suspects of kidnapping hisdaughter, outside the police station.“That’s why I approached the story as a morality tale, a kindof microcosm of the whole idea of torture. It’s tough materialbut very worthwhile.”Prisoners was shot on location in the suburbs of Atlanta, Ga.,and Deakins says his lighting approach was determined asmuch by the available locations and the blocking of action asit was by the story itself. “Deciding on the lighting is alwaysdifficult,” he says. “So often you might have an idea going in,but you can’t get trapped by that because so much dependson the reality of the shooting day. Denis and I looked at a lotof visual references, and we definitely had a look and a feel inmind when we began, but the way it finally came out was amuch more organic process, to use an overused expression.”Deakins shot the picture digitally using an Arri Alexa Studio,an Alexa Plus and Arri Master Prime lenses, capturing inArriRaw. “I needed the exposure the Master Primes offerbecause we had some very low-light situations,” he says. “Irated the Alexa at 1,600 for those, but for most night[exteriors] I usually rated at 1,250 ASA. Everything else, apartfrom a few day exteriors, was rated right at 800 ASA. I like toshoot right in the middle because the image will have morelatitude and more dynamic range.”
Det. Loki (Jake Gyllenhaal) approaches the RV of a suspected kidnapper.Basic source lighting was the rule throughout much of theproduction. As an example, Deakins points to a rainy nightsequence in which Loki and other police officers converge onJones’ dilapidated RV, surrounding the vehicle in an isolatedparking lot. “Originally we looked for a highway rest stop forthis scene, but as we discussed it, I realized that sort oflocation probably wouldn’t have any sources to work from,and I didn’t want to create a moonlight look because thatwould’ve looked artificial,” says the cinematographer. “So, Isuggested we have the RV park by a gas station that had abig parking lot, which would allow us some light sources andadd depth to the landscape. I liked the idea of this bright gasstation in a sea of blackness in the rain, and the RV parked offin the darkness. Visually, that’s how the scene evolved, and itbecame one of my favorites in the film because it’s such astatement, such a harsh look.“So, we had our setting and the lighting of the scene, andthen adding to that is the staging of the action. Loki firstappears in silhouette, coming out of the blackness, with otherofficers approaching with their flashlights, and then we seethe RV and its headlights poking into the woods past the edgeof the parking lot. So, our lighting approach helped dictatethe location, which then helped dictate the staging of thescene, which led to the actual lighting — it was an evolution.Basically, we lit the film by choosing the right places to shootit.”Chief lighting technician Chris Napolitano, one of Deakins’regular collaborators, elaborates: “We kept the lighting in thisscene pretty simple, and we started by boosting the RVheadlights with a couple of Tweenies mounted on the front.Then, each policeman had a flashlight practical fitted with500-lumen LEDs; the conversions were done by IndependentStudio Services, a prop house in Los Angeles that alsoconverted a number of camping-style flashlights for us.Depending on the scene, Roger would usually warm theflashlights a bit with CTO.
“There was a large billboard near the parking lot, and we gotpermission to access it so [rigging gaffer] Kevin Lang and therigging crew could put up some 400-watt Joker Pars, aimingthem down to create pools of light. A little of that was set upto backlight the rain, but we didn’t need that too much.“For shots [looking] the other direction, Roger used a dozenor so 2K Juniors to create a look off in the distance. We putthem in a nice line and dimmed them to about 20 percent,creating a soft glow in the background, out of focus, fordepth.”Location also dictated lighting in a unique reveal sequencethat introduces Loki on that Thanksgiving evening. He iseating dinner alone in a near-empty Chinese restaurant thathas large glass windows, allowing the camera to easily pickLoki up even in relatively long shots from outside. “What’sfunny is that while scouting for that scene, we looked at allthese standard Chinese restaurants, but none of them had aninteresting exterior,” Deakins recalls. “I suggested to Denisthat if we wanted to feel Loki is alone, we’d have to see insidefrom the exterior. So, we kept looking, and we finally foundthis pancake house that was available. It wasn’t a Chineserestaurant, but Denis said, ‘If we add red chairs andchopsticks, it’s a Chinese restaurant.’ The scene has thisminimal, ugly look, with the highway outside and the raincoming down, and he is the loneliest guy in the world.”
Loki sits alone in a Chinese restaurant for Thanksgiving dinner; the scene was shotinside a re-dressed pancake house lit inside with 19″ China balls.The solution to lighting the interior of the restaurant wasChina balls, “but that had nothing to do with it being aChinese restaurant,” Napolitano says with a laugh. “Theshape of the restaurant was kind of octagonal, with thesehuge windows, so Roger came up with a plan to light from thecentral ceiling of the room with white paper China balls. [Keygrip] Mitch Lillian and his crew put together a cable line for usto hang them from so we could slide them around asneeded.” Napolitano used 19″ China balls fitted with socketsand 100-watt household bulbs, which were dimmed down toadd warmth. No fill was used, as the fixtures cast such a soft,realistic toplight on Gyllenhaal.One of Prisoners’ key suspense sequences takes placeduring a candlelight vigil, as dozens gather to raise publicawareness about the girls’ disappearance. Loki scans thecrowd for suspicious-looking attendees, and the scenequickly changes gears to become a chase throughneighboring backyards. “That was a sequence Denisstoryboarded, and we shot it more or less as we’d planned,”Deakins says.Again, Deakins’ lighting strategy was to rely mostly onpracticals. “I didn’t want to put any extraneous light on thescene by using overheads on towers or Condors. I wanted thecandles to be our main source, so we got a lot of double-wickcandles and then dummied a number of them with electricversions for the background; we concealed the bare bulbswith those same little plastic cups people generally use oncandles to protect them from the wind.” Napolitano adds, “Atone point, the scene had 60 to 70 extras, so we had about 30of our dummy candles on dimmers. Those double-wickcandles are never enough, and Roger came up with the ideaof mixing about 20 peanut globes in with the candles thatwere placed on the ground, and that gave us a warm glowcoming from below eye level.”
Deakins abandoned the idea of using flicker generators forthese candle fixtures because “it got too complicated for whatwe were trying to do,” he says. “We ended up putting themstraight on dimmers, which was quicker. I also had 2-foot and3-foot aluminum strips made that each had six or sevensockets, and we’d hide those behind a pillar or an actor togive a bit of light on something else, to boost the effects ofthe candlelight.”For this scene, Deakins rated the Alexa at 1,600 ASA“because it was very minimal lighting, and I wanted to push[the candlelight feel] as far as I could. I could have probablyshot the whole scene just with triple-wick candles, but theflames would have been too large. I find the extra bit of speedI get with digital is a real advantage to the way I like to work.But I won’t go any further than [1,600 ASA], not on the Alexa.You could, but at 2,000 ASA you start getting a bit of noise.”The wild foot chase that begins at the vigil and movesthrough the neighborhood “was lit entirely with many littlegags that we’d rigged on the ground well in advance,”Deakins says. “One of the pluses of working in the sameneighborhood for weeks was that I could come out at the endof a day’s shoot in one place and start doing a little bit oflighting elsewhere. The rigging crew put in all these gagsusing little mushroom bulbs on the houses and in thebackyards, and then they added Redheads behind eachstreetlight to augment that light a bit. We also set up thestreetlights themselves, as none existed at the location;basically, we started with nothing. By the time we came in toshoot, the backgrounds were done, and we could shoot fromvirtually any angle. It’s all lit by what you see in shot, with alittle extra floor lighting on the day.”
DoP Roger Deakins“We were getting away from the standard night-exterior lookof a huge backlight coming down on a wet street, you know?”says Napolitano. “This approach was more suited to this typeof neighborhood. Our local crew guys were kind of blownaway by this practical-heavy approach! And Roger’s attentionto detail is incredible. The crew might set 30 gags in an area,but if one was missing, he’d turn to me and say, ‘Chris, thatoverhang there doesn’t have the light I need.’”Many of these gags comprised a practical that would bevisible on camera surrounded by a ring of smaller lights thatwould be just out of sight. “And then, inside some of thehouses and garages we’d drop a batten strip of 150-watt RFLglobes to create a soft push of light coming out of, say, akitchen window into the back yard,” says Napolitano. “Wealso placed lights off in the distance, at different levels, toadd something in the background for depth.”In addition to the practicals built into the houses andstreetlamps, the electricians sometimes added securitytypefixtures bought from a local hardware store and rewired forhigher output. “We could use those anywhere,” Napolitanosays, “and sometimes we’d use a few 1K Nooks raking acrossa yard, or, at most, a couple of 2K Juniors and Babies. Buthousehold incandescents were our go-to for much of thescene, and we used a lot of gold bounce cards to give a nice,soft push of light coming from the corner to enhancewhatever fixture was working off the house.”
Napolitano adds that although the production made extensive
Prisoners (Trailer) — Roger Deakins, ASC, BSCAmerican Cinematographer
02:42
HOMESOCIETYAMERICAN CINEMATOGRAPHERCLUBHOUSE CONVERSATIONSASC AWARDSMASTER CLASSASC+STORE
use of dimmers to control lighting, the approach wasdecidedly low-tech. “I’ve done some huge movies that reliedon massive dimmer-board systems, but on this movie weused old-school 1K and 2K Variacs pre-rigged into positionand marked so we could reset them as necessary. We alsoinstalled a lot of dimmers in walls on our locations, whereverwe needed a dimmer on a practical, and then wired anotherlight with it. So, if there was a bedroom light on a switch, wewould wire into it another light so that when the actor camein, he’d just hit that switch on the wall, and it would light thepractical and our light with it.”One of Deakins’ biggest lighting challenges was a night sceneat the end of the picture that shows a character trapped in acave-like bunker, and Loki searching just yards away from it.The policeman is on the verge of giving up his hunt, whichwould mean almost certain death for the trapped character.This exterior sequence was staged in the front yard of aramshackle house, and largely lit by boosted householdpracticals and a series of police work lights illuminating theouter area. “I struggled with those last few shots of the filmbecause I was working with the idea of how to light thathouse but also add some tension,” Deakins recalls. “Then wedecided it would make sense for the police to have riggedwork lights, and they could turn them off one by one as theyprepare to leave.”“I like photographing a human face. I find that moreinteresting than anything else, and that’s what I willcontinue to do.”
In essence, the trapped character’s chance of living dims aseach of those lights is extinguished. Deakins notes, “I’llalways remember that wonderful shot Connie Hall [ASC] didin Fat City, when the aging boxer that Tully [Stacy Keach] hasjust beaten is walking down a passage, and they turn thelights out as he goes through. I always thought that was awonderful shot, and I may have had that in my mind.”To create a base illumination for the scene, the house’s porchlighting was intensified with fluorescents until it “became akind of bowl of light that could reach out into the yard just farenough to light it to the edge of [the cave’s location],” saysthe cinematographer. “But justifying having enough light toget out there from the house was tricky.” The work-lightpracticals then completed the effect.
The production’s dailies were timed on location by EFilmcolorist David Picket, who graded the native ArriRaw2880×1620 files using Colorfront On-Set Dailies. Deakinsviewed the results projected on a 17′ screen (at 2048×1152)and via EFilm’s eVue system. Dailies were transcoded to AvidDNxHD for editorial.Deakins did the final timing at EFilm in Hollywood withcolorist Mitch Paulson, who graded 2880×1620 DPX files onan Autodesk Lustre. Final outputs were a 4K DCP, a1920×1080 HD master, and a 4K filmout (on an Arrilaser) toFujifilm Eterna-RDI 4511. Deluxe Laboratories in Hollywoodmade the answer print.Deakins took on Prisoners shortly after wrapping the JamesBond adventure Skyfall (AC Dec. ’12), and he says he foundVilleneuve’s film “harder to shoot, in a way, because we didn’thave the luxury of all those tools and an endless amount ofprep. But, in all, Prisoners is much like the films I’ve beendoing for most of my career. I like character films. I likephotographing a human face. I find that more interesting thananything else, and that’s what I will continue to do.”
TECHNICAL SPECS1.85:1Digital CaptureArri Alexa Studio, PlusArri Master PrimeTagged: Chris Napolitano, David Dastmalchian, David Picket, Denis Villeneuve,efilm, Hugh Jackman, Jake Gyllenhaal, Kevin Lang, Mitch Lillian, Mitch Paulson, PaulDano, Prisoners, Roger Deakins, Terrence HowardRead More
Sony Announces RX10 VOrbital Opens atTelevision CityCadrage LaunchesCadrage StudioProfoto Unveils 6Solutions
SubscribeTodayAct now to receive 12issues of the award-winning AC magazine —the world’s ﬁnestcinematographyresource.
The American Society of CinematographersLoyalty, Progress, Artistry
Email
