film-theory-analysis-on-requiem-for-a-dream.pdf
https://angeladesousablog.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/film-theory-analysis-on-requiem-for-a-dream.pdf

An Analysis of the Film
“Requiem for a Dream ”
by Angela de Sousa
(06th May 2014 _Film Theory )
Page 1 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014 Film Analysis of “ Requiem for a Dream ”
Director: Darren Aronofsky
Writer: Hubert Selby Jr (based on his book / Screenplay)
Darren Aronofsky (Screenplay)
Release Date: October 2000
Genre: Drama
Starring: Ellen Burnstyn.........................................................................Sara Goldfarb
Jared Leto..............................................................................Harry Goldfarb
Jennifer Connelly......... .............................................................Marion Silver
Marlon Wayans.....................................................................Tyrone C. Love
Christopher McDonald................................ ...........................Tappy Tibbons
Keith David........................................................................................Big Tim
Sean Gullette............................................................... ......Arnold the Shrink
An ancient Chinese proverb states that “one picture is worth ten thousand words”
and in the film ‘Requiem for a Dream’ it is very true . The basic plot of the film is
about addiction and the harsh reality of outcomes that it has upo n its victims. The
film focuses specifically on the lives of Sara and Harry Goldfarb (mother and son),
Marion Silver (Harry’s girlfriend) and Tyrone C. Love (Harry’s best friend). The film
takes place in Coney Island (Brooklyn, New York City, North America ) and spans
over a few months , from summer to winter in their lives while they go through the
ordeals of exploring the alluring world of addiction and how their lives spiral out of
control and resulting in t hem being consumed by the effects of the se addict ions.
Page 2 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014 The meaning behind the film in which Darren Aronofsky is portraying is that
addictions have a high cost (not necessarily in monetary terms but in what you might
lose of yourself and those around you in the process) and that it will lead to a
negative outco me. The film is a depiction of how people try run away from the harsh
realities of life by replacing it with something that subdues us or gives us that brief
moment of euphoria. This becomes an addiction because the more we want to
escape reality the more we need our chosen fix and that it will eventually consume
us. Just like the hole in Harry’s arm. What is also interesting, and what Darren
Aronofsky captures is the lengths people will go in order to obtain their addictions
even if it means creating new a ddictions and even setting aside all sense of morality
and relationships. The purpose of this film and the themes that it is addressing is to
show the dark side of what addiction has on its subjects physically, emotionally and
mentally, that there are cons equences to our actions and that relationships can steer
us towards certain direction regarding our actions, if the relationships are broken
then we will undoubtedly follow a broken (self -destructive) path and that we should
be aware of the dangers.
Throu ghout the entire film we are subjected to the characters decisions in their
partaking of their addictions and we are following their lives along a subjective view
of all the situations they are faced with and the consequences of their actions. It is as
if we ourselves are either partaking along with them or it can also be seen from the
point the we are peeping into their personal lives, right down into the darkest hidden
corners, judging them as they make one mistake right after another without the
option o f lending a helping hand, all we can do is watch their lives descend into
desolation.
The Encarta English Dictionary describes ‘Addiction’ as follows:
- Drug dependence - a state of physiological or psychological dependence on a
potentially harmful drug
- Devotion - a great interest in a particular thing to which a lot of time is devoted
- Need to do an activity – a strong need or wish to spend as much time as
possible doing a particular thing
Page 3 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014
The word ‘drug’ in the above mentioned definition, I believe, is no t only limited to
illegal narcotics but it included other substances that we tend to abuse on a daily
basis, examples of these are tobacco, caffeine, sweets and sugars etc.
The composition of the film used was captured well by cinematographer Matthew
Libatique. There are different perspectives being used throughout the film with the
use of the different camera techniques and they will be discussed below.
In the beginning of the film we are introduced to Sara Goldfarb and Harry Goldfarb
(mother and Son) as they bicker amongst each other from two separate rooms. She
has locked herself in the closet while Harry is on the other side (living room) and is
trying to take her television set that she had chained up in an attempt to keep him
from taking it, even if she confesses that she has done so to keep the robbers from
taking it. Possibly it can also be seen as her being chained to her addiction of
television. This scene is interesting as it is depicted by a split s creen (Figure 1) - a
‘scene’ is made up of several shots that take place in the same location and time and
a ‘split screen’ is when two images are shown at the exact same time on the screen
but on opposite sides and in each side it is showing two different images that can
either be at the same location and time or they can be at different locations and at
different times. In this specific scene we get to see Sara in the closet while Harry is
in the living room, we get to see both of their reactions how both of them are trying to
make one another fee guilt, how she is afraid of him and it also represents that they
have a ‘split’ relationship. There is another use of a split screen when Harry and
Marion are having an intimate encounter but we see them separate ly on the screen
and how the way that they are touching each other is more of an un -intimate
encounter (Figure 2) .
Page 4 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014
There as a number of wide angled shots in the beginning of them film. A ‘wide
angle’ shot is used to depict the location of where the subject is and/or what is
happening around the subject. We see a few examples of this while Harry and
Tyrone are pushing the television set along the streets of Coney Island to pawn it off
to get money for their drugs (Figure 3) . In this film the wide angl e shot is not only just
to portrayed the location of where the film is
taking place or where the subjects are but it
was used in the sense that we are still not in
the thick of things just yet. There is a moment
when Harry and Tyrone pass the back of the
Coney Island Amusement Park and captures
in its view the roller coaster tracks above them; this is one of the many subtle hints
that are given throughout the film that the characters and we, as viewers, will be
taken along a roller coaster ride.
There is an irritatingly redundant amount of montages used. A ‘montage’ is a
subsequent amount of images and sounds that are shown right after one another,
usually in a rapid procession. The montages are used throughout the film whenever
a character is partakin g their addictions, even during a split screen montage to
differentiate between the two characters partaking of their own separate addictions
during the same moment of time in the same place yet they are apart (this is seen
right before the shot of Harry a nd Marion on the bed slowly spinning – Figure 4 ).
These montages are a bunch of random images and sounds that give the viewer an
understanding of a quick fix, how simple the process appears and as to what it is that
they are taking. There is no use for dia logue in these scenes since the imaginary and
sound captures it clearly and each of these scenes where catered for each character
specifically as to what their addiction is. With Harry, Marion and Tyrone it was a lot of
illegal narcotic drugs, money and ci garettes
whereas with Sara, her montage scenes
where mainly her watching the television,
eating and excessively taking diet pills to
combat the binge eating and speed pills in
order to help her lose weight.
Page 5 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014
The scene above mentioned of Harry and Marion on the bed that is slowly zooming
out and spiralling is another hint that their lives are spinning out of control. Their
dialogue is that of love for each other but they are s taring straight up above and they
are hardly making any contact with one another so it’s another representation that
they are more ‘self’ loving and that their relationship is not whole like they want it to
be.
Some shots were done with a Snorricam (a small camera that is strapped onto the
subject so that when they move they are kept in centre while the background moves
so to give a more realistic sense of what the character is experiencing). This is used
when Tyrone is running away when the other drug dealers got gunned down and he
is covered in blood and scared out of him mind right up to where the cops capture
him. It is also used when Marion is doing the walk of shame when she leaves
Arnolds room after having to have coital encounter with him for money and she is
walking down the corridor to the elevator and up to where she is outsi de in the rain
and pukes. It is also used with Sara when she is
finally in the red dress but is extremely paranoid and
is hearing things in the apartment, like the loud dial
tone sound that the telephone is making since it is off
the hook. Figure 5 shows t he Snorricam that was
attached to actress Jennifer Connelly.
The use of close -ups and extreme close -ups techniques became more aware as the
film progressed. ‘Close -ups’ focus closely in on the subject (Figure 6) whereas an
‘extreme close -up’ focuses in tently onto a specific attribute of the subject (Figure 7) .
You can see these during the montage scenes where there are brief moments of the
characters eyes dilating, pills falling onto the palm of Sara’s hands or even when
Harry is shooting up with heroin e and we have an extreme look of how nasty his arm
is looking and we see the needle penetrate into it. Yuk !
Page 6 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014
‘Point of view’ shots are pretty much explanatory, it is the view from the subject or
character s level of observation, but there are a number of high angle and low angle
shots being used. A ‘high angle’ is an examination taken from a high position
overlooking onto a subject whereas a ‘low angle’ is taken from below eye level and is
looking upwards at the s ubject. Some
examples of a high angle in the film are the
scene with Marion is in the elevator and later
with her again in the bathroom towards the end
of the film where she is getting ready to meet
Big Tim (Figure 8). These give the feeling of
belittlemen t that what she is doing is morally
wrong and that we as viewers are spectators
looking down on her. Examples of low angle
shots are where Harry and Tyrone are in the
car going to Florida, this renders a false hope
for us that things might be looking up fo r them (Figure 9).
A ramping technique (cameras frame rate is changed to give the films action a
slower paced speed) was used during the scene where Sara is running down the
street after her hallucinations got the better of her and the visual effect that this
technique gave is of her running down the street in a slowed down effect yet the
people around her are moving at an incredible speed that they are mere blurs
(Figure 10).
Fisheye camera lens is an extreme wide angled lens that distorts the image to
appear closer in the middle of the image and stretc hed out towards the sides.
Example of this techniques use in the film is seen in the instance with Sara in the
doctor’s room (Figure 1 1).
Page 7 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014
Vibracam techniques, where the cameras movements are violently rapid and shaky,
were used with Sara when she is all paranoid and hallucinating from the effects of
the pills and is surrounded by the people from the television show.
There is also the use of a fast motion technique in the beginning of the film. This
technique is similar to the ramping technique; however, this is to speed up an image.
It was used with Harry, Marion and Tyler while they are high on drugs and their
movements are sped up to represent the brief effect of elation the drugs have on
your body or during the scenes of Sara cleaning up her apartment also under the
influence.
There is an instance where the axis line is broken or crossed over during the scene
where Harry goes to visit Sara in her apartment where we see Harry from the right
side but th en little while later it is not the left side (Figure 1 2 and 1 3).
Even down to the effects used in the typography used in the beginning of the film for
the title and the names of the cast members were catered towards the films general
look. The words would appear and then disintegrate into nothing. Then the harsh cut
ins of the words Summer, Fall and Winter to inform us that not only are we following
them from Summer, Fall and Winter but I believe Aronofsky was using the seasons
to help with the connotation that things are going to a destructive end. Summer being
good, Fall (Autumn) a representation of the characters ‘fall’ into the dark side and
Winter, the bitter cold that destroys all that remains. There is no sight of Spring,
perhaps to inform us that these characters are left in an endless Winter.
The musical tone of the film is also suited for this film with its rapid nuances and
irritatingly scratchy pitches that are insanely depictive of the story and assists us as a
spectator to experien ce the uncomfortable and menacing experiences theses
Page 8 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014
characters are going through. It is that itch you just cannot seem to scratch, it is
constantly taunting you and the more you think of it the itchier it becomes and drives
you insane.
Another thing t o keep track of is the colour scheme throughout the film which is
always a gloomy pale greenish colour or at times has a yellow or blue tone, but as
the film escalated towards the end the colours becomes duller or darker . Even the
characters clothing, they are usually all wearing dull or darker colours. The scene in
the film, where, scene -after-scene from Harry and Marion on the bed spinning to
Sara in her apartment and to that of Tyrone in the jail cell they can all be seen
wearing black and dark greyish c lothing, perhaps this was another subtle hint given
that past this point for all of them there is no turning back, they will now have to
endure the ride upon this sinking ship (Figure 1 4, 15 and16). Also note that in all of
these images that there is a blue (cold / depressing) tone.
The only moments in the film with bright colours are during the dream sequences of
Sara and Harry. For Sara her dreams are usually seeing herself in the red dress,
where she is on the ‘Month of Fury’ show and everyone is cheering her on and she is
happy. With Harry’s dream sequences he sees Marion on the pier overlooking the
ocean, she is also wearing red, he is happy and is running towards her, she turns
around to see him and she is happy but they are interrupted, she loo ks behind Harry
as if it was something from where he came from, but Harry is being awoken from his
dream state by Tyrone entering the room of their apartment. It is as if for that brief
moment in his dream state Harry was realising that the best thing for his life is
Marion and that he should leave all the addiction behind him and build their
relationship, however the downward spiral that he finds himself on and drags Marion
along severs the last remaining connection that the two have.
Page 9 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014
In another dream sequ ence of Harry’s towards the ending he is running again
towards Marion but his appearance is that of urgency but she is not there and he
walks backwards and falls into an empty fit of darkness into a dirty ally way. Here it
describes that as Harry’s roller coaster journey has climaxed to its end, he finally
realises that has lost Marion and his life has fallen backwards into despair.
The way in which certain emotions where captured without dialogue were brilliantly
portrayed by the actors and gave us a more in-depth knowledge of the characters,
where Tyrone is on him bed alone looking at a photo of his mom and that it is raining
outside tells us more about how he longs for his mother. Marion at dinner with Arnold
is seem screaming inside her head lets us know that she is at war with herself about
deciding whether or not she should sleep with him for money and later on in the film
when she is in the bathtub after having been with Big Tim she appears all calm and
serene under the waters but she screams out.
In the films ending after the climax we can see all four characters in the foetal
position (Figure 1 7). This position is usually used when we are feeling lost, cold or
sad and we are in need of something comforting, warm and familiar. It is a fine
ending, wel l horrible for the characters but in the sense of composition it is good. The
ending brings these unfortunate souls to terms with the consequences of addiction
and not only can we abuse it but it abuses us too.
Page 10 of 10
Angela de Sousa Film Theory/Analysis _Assignment - Requiem for a Dream 06 May 2014 The film ‘ Requiem for a Dream’ is compose d well and the use of camera techniques
is executed exceptionally. We follow the pace of the film (including music and the
length of the scenes) as they start to become shorter and more rapid so that
everything escalates during the films climax, where as A ronofsky states “all hell
breaks loose”. You cannot help but feel your body start to tense as the film
progresses and the moment the climax is over you can feel yourself breath again
and the muscles in your body slowly loosening. You feel emotionally exhau sted from
all the intense visual techniques and moments, saddened and horrified by what you
have just witnessed, but rest assured you will reach catharsis too, as a viewer, once
the film ends and the credits role because you are happy to get back to your o wn
reality which, hopefully, is in no way close to what you have just witnessed.
In conclusion from the examples above about all the camera techniques we can see
that the cameras role in the film was that of a narrator as there were many instances
in whic h the images portrayed more information and realism than what any words
could bringing us back to the ancient Chinese proverb mentioned in the beginning of
this analysis...”One picture is worth ten thousand words”.
