scott.pdf
https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/scope/documents/2005/february-2005/scott.pdf

The Persona of Se7en
Jason Scott, Sheffield Hallam University, UK
In this essay I wish to explore the notion of film 'persona'. I propose that the persona provides
a model for understanding the reception and consumption of the individual film, considering
how it is discursively characterised. I hypothesize that this construction of the key
characteristics and associations for the film will not simply reduce to the standard critical
categories of genre, auteur, stars and nationality or at least not as these categories are
generally understood in academic terms. Instead, the persona will feature some specific
combination of these and other concepts. This configuration is engendered by the film's
marketing campaign rather than derived from the film and so is potentially inconsistent with
the film, either in specific details or emphasis. In the case of the British reviews of Se7en
(1995), then, my case study suggests the persona is primarily defined in respect of particular
tropes; the sins, darkness, serial killer, David Fincher and the stars, Brad Pitt and Morgan
Freeman. The film's genre is favourably determined in relation to the serial killer subject
matter, with an association with The Silence of the Lambs (1990), and differentiated by the
sins. The style of the film, and its quality of realism, are developed in respect of the trope of
darkness and Fincher. Almost invariably, the critics emphasise the visual darkness of the film
that readily conflates with its metaphoric darkness, the bleak tone of the film, whilst eliding
the shift to light that also characterises the film (Dyer, 1999: 61, 78). The respective stars
contribute divergent connotations to the film.
I define the persona of a film as "the connotations which the entire [marketing] campaign
including publicity and promotion creates for the film" [following Wyatt who defines the
persona in passing in relation to the 'image' for High Concept films] (Wyatt, 1994:105). The
persona, then, constitutes the 'consumable identity' of a film. This consumable identity is
evidenced in the epiphenomena surrounding a film, the intertextual network of "posters, ads
and trailers, as well as an extensive array of intermedia coverage which features pieces on
stars, directors and the making of films" which identify a film as a commodity (Klinger,
1989: 5). I retain Wyatt's term persona since it emphasises both the construction of salient (or
surface) details and yet also the unity binding these factors. Whilst the Concise Oxford
Dictionary definition of persona stresses its conventional association with a human
personality, persona also connotes the selection and presentation of an 'acceptable' aspect.
Similarly to star persona, or star image as defined by Richard Dyer, the persona of a film is a
complex totality , a construction that is amenable to (structured) polysemic readings (Dyer,
1979: 63). Significantly, the film distributors attempt to police the persona of the film
primarily through the key elements of the marketing campaign; the press pack, press releases,
posters, ads and trailers. I will proceed to outline the persona of Se7en in relation to analysing
this film's press release and reviews. Whilst the press release does not shape the way
reviewers write about the film, it does establish a conceptual framework. As I shall
demonstrate in relation to Se7en , reviews frequently draw upon this framework using tropes
evidently derived from the press release rather than the film. The variation amongst press
releases for different films demonstrates that each is a specific attempt to police discussion of
its film rather than simply a listing of information conventionally required by the reviewer.
The persona effects product differentiation, both as a marketing and legal function. Product
differentiation is constructed in terms of "plotline, stars, production value, genre, social
relevance and difference/similarity to other films (originality)" (Wyatt, 1994: 99). The legal
function is interwoven with marketing. The persona, encompassing the production status of
the film, the director, the stars and all other authorial subjects, is a discursive manifestation of
the legal and economic circumstances of production -- the 'package', personnel, story rights
and financing.
What are the defining characteristics of the persona and what are the aspects or features that
comprise it? What form does the persona take? Marketing puts the persona into circulation
but the persona is not determined by marketing. Primarily discursive in nature, the persona is
transient and heterogeneous, a composite of features of the film and film production
foregrounded and designated as valuable (or vivid). These features are the commodified
elements: character/stars, style including mise en scène (setting/costumes) and
cinematography, subject matter/genre (which might relate to production trends), spectacle
and realism (Klinger, 1989: 12). David Bordwell suggests a list of film properties that critics
valorise: important subject matter, realistic treatment, logical story line, spectacle, intriguing
characters, valid message, novelty within sameness (particularly for remakes and sequels),
are all features of the persona with value attributed to them (Bordwell, 1989: 37). These
features of the film and film production are activated in the persona, primarily as semantic
fields, "a set of relations of meaning between conceptual or linguistic units"(ibid. p.106).
Bordwell suggests that the critic's reconstruction of a film, by means of activating semantic
fields, produces a "model film", often by means of "personification" (ibid. p.161, p.245-6). I
suggest that before, during and after the act of viewing the audience (including critics)
constructs a 'model film' which is their individualised coherent version of the persona.
Persona of Se7en: The Press Release and Reviews
I propose that by considering the press release and further analysing the conceptual and
verbal influence the press release sustains within the reviews, it will be possible to
characterise the particular features of the persona of Se7en . How can I interpret the
classifications, categorizations, description and interpretations made by reviews to derive the
connotations for the film? Historical reception studies, and in particular its use of textual
analysis of reviews, provides an established methodology for engaging with actual
understandings of film. How can I account for the connotations and associations figured in
individual reviews in respect of reviewer agency, the film 'text', context and extra-textual
factors? Again, reception studies assumes some relationship between textual readings, or
descriptions, and extra-textual components. Historical context and the horizon of expectations
provide a background set or frame which helps journalistic reviewers and audiences make
sense of and describe the film (Staiger, 1992: 195 and 1986: 22). Reviews, advertising,
talkshows and "even films about making films" "make available a limited number of
'appropriate' interpretive strategies" (Staiger, 1986: 20). Barbara Klinger has suggested that
each film dwells in a shifting habitat of meaning, at different points in its history (Klinger,
1994: xvii). A critic, like any "reader interpreting any work of literature or film will be
drawing upon interpretive frames historically available to him or her, and these frames will
be influential even in the act of perception or the process of comprehension and evaluation"
(Staiger, 1992: 21). Hence, amongst these historically appropriate reading strategies are
"groupings of films, such as genres, modes, styles and authorial sources", the stability or
nonstability of which are questioned by reception studies, as are other discursive structures
for interpretation which likewise undergo historical shifts as proposed by Michel Foucault
(Staiger, 1992: 11, 16). Reception studies provide various approaches to audience discourse
that are variably applicable to critics' discourses: cultural studies contributes Hall's
decoding/encoding model and conversely Schroder's multi-dimensional model (Schroder,
2000: 245); social semiotics practised by Hodge and Kress; ethnographic approaches,
illustrated by Schroder; communication studies, such as Corner; and discourse analysis
developed by Barker and Brooks. Whilst I am primarily deriving my methodology from
Bordwell's rhetorical analysis, elaborated in his Making Meaning (1989), this shares key
similarities with Barker and Brooks' use of discourse analysis [unsurprisingly since rhetorical
studies provides a key antecedent for discourse analysis]. Barker and Brooks provide a
breakdown of characteristics by which audience discourses might be described: repetitions,
connections, distinctions, implications, key concepts, modalities and puzzles (Barker and
Brooks, 1998: 52). Each of these characteristics provides a trace of the contingent ways by
which audiences understand films by making key aspects salient. Barker and Brooks proceed
to associate these discursive formations with particular 'practical logics' of how audiences
engage with a film -- on the basis of minimal knowledge audiences determine "what is likely
to be meant by a title, a poster, a star, a review" and hence make the decision to watch the
film and how to engage with it (ibid.).
I choose to primarily adopt the textual analysis exemplified by Janet Staiger in her Taboos
and Totems (1993) but combine this with the systematic potential of Bordwell's rhetorical
analysis. I attempt to isolate the means by which certain semantic fields are activated and I
identify which tropes feature within the press release and reviews. Practising textual analysis
on the individual texts, I locate traces of the construction of the persona of Se7en . Textual
analysis incorporates various approaches and perspectives and as part of a reception studies
approach constitutes for Janet Staiger, "the best means currently available for analysing
cultural meanings" (Staiger, 1993: 14). Working through these recurrent tropes I shall
determine the extent to which the reviews reproduce unalterably certain tropes whilst
adapting others. By considering the respective treatment of the tropes from the press release
in the reviews and the variety of emphases by which certain tropes are privileged and
repeated by each review I shall characterise this wider network of meanings that defines the
film's persona. My analysis is based upon the UK press release for the theatrical release of
Se7en , sourced from the BFI archive which evidently is identical to the US version, except
for the addition of an alternative cover sheet providing the contact details of the UK
distribution company. In other cases the differences between versions of the press release for
particular territories will influence variations in the persona for different territories.
Textual analysis is predicated on the promise of a methodical, rigorous attention to the text
but, as with any interpretative approach whether applied to the film or the review material, it
is subjective and to some degree impressionistic. I have analysed the reviews with my own
version of the persona in mind. I have identified particular semantic fields as being privileged
in several ways: by repetition, by the use of variations in register or tone to highlight, by
features of format, by organisational features of the text and by implication and structured
absence as well as through the use of rhetorical devices. Within repetition I include literal
repetition, the use of synonyms and pleonasm. Additionally, tropes might recur through
conflation wherein two variant terms or meanings are blended into one, or through metonymy
and homological repetition across conceptual levels or fields. This includes relating subjects
within the film to the real world. Register and tone might include the use of puns, the
factualised or informative use of objective description, opinion, acknowledged or given
authorial legitimacy and opinion given as fact as well as narrativised material. Hence,
specific semantic fields might be marked by the address of the text.
Formatting features which are salient include title headers, text highlighted in bold, italicised,
or capitalised and other decorative elements reflexive of the 'written' quality, the mediated
nature, of each text. These would also significantly include captions for photographs and the
photographs themselves. Organisation of the text involves both the ordering of textual
features and ordering and juxtaposition of particular tropes. Implication might take the form
of structured absence, the circumlocution of a term, possibly clichéd, by the use of more
specialist alternative synonyms or the complete avoidance of a concept. Alternatively,
implication might be associational by means of reference or analogy. Rhetorical features
might include metaphor, the use of specialist terminology or unusual terms for the purpose of
vividness or expressiveness as elocutio and revelation, that is, the explicit expression of
something figured as undisclosed, symptomatic or implicit. Bordwell characterises the
various types of semantic relations, the cluster, the doublet, proportional series and
hierarchies, such that they relate directly to repetition and relations of contrast.
The Sins Trope
The first trope I consider in the press release, which is used to construct a clustered semantic
field is that of sinners orsins. A quotation from Chris Pula, New Line Marketing Chief who
oversaw the marketing of Se7en , suggests the star of the movie was "the crime, the seven
deadly sins," (Matzer, 1996:14). Noting the conflation of the crimes, murders and sins, we
can identify how the sins are used to provide significance and difference for the film's generic
serial murder plotline. The sins are easily associated with the film title and this association is
developed by explicit reference to the seven sins and seven murders and implicitly by each
complete listing of the sins. The sins are clearly privileged by the entire marketing campaign;
they feature throughout the press release as well as being listed and referred to in the
advertising poster and film synopsis. The sins are emphasised by capitalisation in the press
release and such expressive characterisation as "the diabolical denominator" or "catalyst" that
links the murders within the film and distinguishes the film itself. Ultimately, the press
release emphasises the sins by the inclusion of a section "About the Seven Deadly Sins". This
provides definitions for each deadly sin, biblical and dictionary, and includes references to
international literary works which feature the sins, some of which feature as dialogue
references in the film. The capitalised sins provide a relation between the real world and the
diegetic world, like the character/star unit, being both of and extrinsic to the film. The section
on the sins is distinguished in terms of the encyclopaedic register, which contrasts with the
more journalistic tenor of sections on the cast and production staff. The listing of all seven
sins in the press release serves to encourage similar reference in reviews. Also, the particular
ordering of the sins, and ordered reference to the film's murders with the sins and murders
being explicitly equated, suggests implicitly a serial structure to the narrative. Reference in
this section to the "striking" paintings of Hieronymous Bosch also contrives to construct a
relation between the filmmakers, most notably Fincher, and the medieval artist. This
implication is prepared for by the press release since Fincher has already been validated for
the movie frames appearing like oil paintings. In a sense then, the sins, both as a feature of
the film and as aspects of the persona, can be seen to mark the difference of Se7en in relation
to genre; to films about serial killers, perhaps most notably in comparison to The Silence of
the Lambs or to other police procedural thrillers. At the same time, by association with the
literary works referenced and the paintings of Bosch, the marketing seeks to appropriate
values conferred on these for the film, as well as developing connotations for the moral and
philosophical interests of the film including its apocalyptic overtones.
The sins trope is invariably reproduced by the press reviews, most commonly by explicit
reference to the "Seven Deadly Sins" (or "seven deadly sins"). Almost all the reviews
maintain the association with the title whilst at least one interview explicitly explains the title,
"seven connotes the deadly sins" (McLeod, 1995: 16). The trope is used to differentiate the
film, in terms of genre and the character of the serial killer but also continuing from the press
release by attaching other connotations of sins. The murders and sins are variously identified,
with the murders described as "based on" (McLeod, 1995: 16, Malcolm, 1996: 9, French,
1996: 12), "inspired by" (Brett, 1996: 33, Johnston, 1996: 8, Billson, 1996: 10, Grant, 1996:
35, Harry, 1996: 32), "patterned around" (Andrews, 1996: 11), "to illustrate" (Brown, 1996:
31, Newman, 1996: 10), "to represent" (Curtis, 1996: 13, Davenport, 1996: 20), or otherwise
fitting or "appropriate to" the sins (Higginbotham, 1996: 7, Johnston, 1996: 8, Romney, 1996:
35, Walker, 1996: 32). Elsewhere, the victims or their bodies are equated as personifying or
representing the sins. The identification is clearly overdetermined, not simply by the press
release and marketing campaign that equate the sins/murders as the characteristic feature of
the film but also by the word play on 'deadly sins'. Only two of the reviews explicitly draw
attention to this double meaning by awkward repetition of the term deadly; "if their sins are
deadly, their deaths are horrific" (Cameron-Wilson, 1996: 10) and "a series of deadly
murders 'inspired' by the seven deadly sins" (Brett, 1996: 33). Otherwise, the reviews make
this conflation without acknowledgement, even in the form of punning. However, the sins are
a subject for puns and word plays, particularly emphasised by inclusion in the headline or
title of individual reviews. These include; "Built for Sin" (Taubin, 1995: 82), "Sin has seldom
looked so good" (Johnston, 1996: 8), "See it before you go sinning" (Cameron-Wilson, 1996:
10), "Shock of the serial sinner"(Walker, 1996: 32), "Nasty, sordid, gruesome, but a sin to
miss this hit"(Tookey, 1996: 44) and "Deadliest of serial sinners" (Davenport, 1996: 20)
[Janet Staiger has noted the prevalence and significance of puns in review headlines in her
case study of The Silence of the Lambs (Staiger, 1993: 146). For further examples of review
headlines see my References where headlines feature as review titles where applicable.].
The focus of the majority of review headlines, then, is the sins, although other titles refer to
the serial killer and darkness tropes. As well as being privileged in describing the theme or
concept of the film, the sins are also used by the reviews to make associations prefigured by
the press release. Hence the film is associated with artistry in connection with the sins, in
some cases by allusion to Hieronymous Bosch (Tookey, 1996: 44 and Davenport, 1996: 20)
or else with the individual murder scenes being related to artistic tableaux or installations [as
installation and also akin to Damien Hirst and Francis Bacon (Johnston, 1996: 8), in relation
to Hirst (Taubin, 1996: 23), related to Pop Art and performance art (Walker, 1996: 32) and
tableaux (Elliott, 1996: 65)], and "masterpiece" (Curtis, 1996: 13). Similarly, the film is
defined as moral; "a morality tale", "a vision of evil", a parable, an "illustration" or "critique"
(implicitly a sermon) of the sins, participating in an "apocalyptic debate" [as moral tale
(Tookey, 1996: 44, Billson, 1996: 10), as illumination (Higginbotham, 1996: 8), as vision
(Davenport, 1996: 20), as illustration (Cameron-Wilson, 1996: 10), as critique and parable
(Amidon, 1996: 6) and as apocalyptic debate (Curtis, 1996: 13)]. The film is here understood
as being about part of the content of the film, applying the reflexivity field as a review
heuristic (Bordwell, 1989: 112). As I suggested previously, the listing of the sins suggested
by the press release and taken up by approximately a quarter of the reviews also provides
biblical and medieval connotations, as well as 'vividness' by means of the use of words out of
common usage such as "gluttony". Similarly the use of terms like "hell" and "apocalypse" are
marked by, and mark, the connotations of the sins. The treatment of the term "darkness", the
trope involving darkness as a metaphor, also relates to the connotations for the sins.
The Darkness Trope
I would suggest the cluster of connotations elicited by the press release treatment of the sins,
including the extratextual references and the biblical definitions, informs the treatment of the
trope of darkness, most often synonymised in the reviews by the middle English word 'gloom'
(gloom in Cameron-Wilson, 1996: 10, Romney, 1996: 35, Higginbotham, 1996: 7, Billson,
1996: 10, French, 1996: 12 and Curtis, 1996: 13 with murk in Billson, 1996: 10, Brown,
1996: 62, and Taubin, 1995: 23) which characterises the film as dark, both visually and in
mood, and as possessing a medieval quality (the apocalyptic register, as in the sermonising
address within and of the film).
The trope of darkness is perhaps equally consistently emphasised by the press campaign and
more readily informs the genre and style aspects of the persona. Extratextual evidence
suggests that darkness was an overdetermined, overriding, feature of the campaign, with the
image of the film represented within TV spots, print ads and posters with a consistent look;
"slimy, dark and menacing," to "maintain that display of darkness on every level" (Matzer,
1996: 13). Notably, Amy Taubin in Sight and Sound relates the success of Se7en to the
"arresting", "murky" print ads (Taubin, 1996: 23). The film synopsis again verbalises this
feature, referencing the "dark and daunting underworld that metropolitan homicide detectives
encounter on a daily basis." We can trace the conflation of visual darkness and the
metaphoric darkness of the subject matter, here specifically related to the real world, which is
continued in the press release and the vast majority of reviews by selective choice of
synonyms for darkness and metaphorical descriptions of the film's narrative. The conflation is
also made explicit in relating the style of the film to the subject matter and the film
production process. The filmmaker's preference for expressive realism is cited as motivating
the mise en scène and cinematography: "the eerie look and mood of the film" in which the
setting (diegetic and set design) "reflects the moral decay of the people in it"; each murder
scene "illustrates" a sin. Subsequently, the press release concentrates on the visual darkness
of the film, developing the trope in discussion of the technical aspects of production. The
metaphoric darkness remains a distinguishing feature, "the disturbing ending" cited by
Arnold Kopelson, the producer of the film, and implicitly by association made in the section
on the sins. However, the darkness trope is subsumed to characterisation of the film style
within an informative toned narrativisation of the film production process. Here reference is
repeatedly made by use of loose synonyms such as "shadows", "silhouettes" and etymological
variations, "dark", "darkness", "darks" as well as antonyms, some simple others strict;
"lightness", "brighter", "whites", "lighter", "sunlight". This repetition is further elaborated by
the use of technical terminology, the acronym C.C.E. describing the silver retention process
used in some prints of the film.
By contrast, the organisation of the press release, which succeeds this discussion of the
technical merits of the film's visual darkness with the comparison of the film to oil paintings
(implicitly to Bosch, as above), creates further conceptual links to the trope as a means of
distinguishing the style of the film. In relation to the trope of darkness the press release
features an important absence, a structured absence mitigated by this concentration on the
technical paraphernalia of visual darkness, in effacing the supplementary trope of
brightening . This trope, which complicates the description of the visual in the film, is found
in few of the reviews, as discussed below. However, as these reviewers illustrate, the look of
the film, the particular lighting regime and the settings, undergoes a development with the
narrative. In this instance we can recognise an important justification for the analysis of the
persona. The persona can demonstrate contradictions and inconsistencies in comparison to
the film itself. One might propose that the press release avoidance of the brightening trope is
predicated on securing a simpler characterisation of metaphoric and visual darkness in order
to ease word of mouth and accessibility/appeal. The darkness trope, like the sin trope,
functions to differentiate the film but in this case by integrating the subject matter and the
style of the film.
The darkness trope, as in the press release, is used by the reviews in order to associate the
subject matter and distinctive style of Se7en . Predominantly the reviews concentrate on the
visual darkness of the film and its diegetic settings. However, almost equally common is
explicit or implicit use of darkness as a metaphor to define the mood or tone of the film's
depiction of the narrative. Hence, the cinematography and mise en scène are readily
associated with the subject matter of the film and its particular take on genre. Amongst the
synonyms for darkness found in the reviews are "gloom" and "murk", which both singularly
conflate these different senses of darkness and, as proposed above, carry etymological
connotations attached to their usage and origin. Around two thirds of the reviews, either by
careful use of synonyms or by a combination of terms, conflate the visual and metaphorical
meanings of darkness. Since this conflation is implicit in the overall marketing campaign, and
easily readable, I would suggest that the darkness trope contributes to the persona primarily
in relation to this dominant reading and the consequent association of style and subject
matter. Where a distinction is made between the visual and metaphoric darkness inherent in
the film this is developed as a sophisticated interpretation of the film. This is most often
found in the more highbrow reviews except where it is punned, "dark subject matter and even
darker sets" (Grant, 1996: 35). This particular conceptual distinction can be considered a
secondary or subordinate inflection of the darkness trope as part of the persona. Similarly, as
mentioned in respect of the press release, the associated trope of brightening is predominantly
elided. Only two U.K. reviews make such a reference, either explicitly, the "voyage from
claustrophobic murk into blinding light makes for vivid dramatic metaphor" (Andrew, 1996:
62), or implicitly, to the climax under a "blazing sun" (Sutcliffe, 1996: 7). This omission can
be understood in relation to the successful policing of the persona as well as the minimal
coherence hermeneutic of review journalism, which prohibits unnecessary complication.
Nonetheless, the reviews do organise a semantic field around the trope of darkness with some
degree of complexity. For instance, darkness is often defined within a relation of binary
opposition with light or some related antonym. The reviews variously figure darkness as a
term in a pair or triplet either combining different senses of the trope or else making an
association with the related tropes urban, rain and dirt/decay as detailed below. Darkness is
also organised as a term in relation to David Fincher and his aesthetic. Hence, darkness
constitutes an extensive clustered semantic field and contributes to the persona in terms of
subject matter, style, authorship, genre and realism.
The Serial Killer
The dominant generic trope, excepting the contribution to the generic persona of darkness, is
theserial killer . This defines the generic aspect of the persona in relation to a serial killer
subgenre of the thriller genre and also relates the film to the particular example of another
serial killer film, The Silence of the Lambs . Again, I suggest the press release prepares this
trope by implication, with avoidance of the term 'serial killer', and by association. The
preferred terms of the press release and the synopsis are "series of murders" and to describe
the murderer, "killer", "cunning and meticulous" and "intelligent and criminally creative".
The murders themselves are characterised as a "masterpiece", generating a vague
homological relation between the character of the killer and the mise en scène of the
production process similar to that hypothesised with the darkness trope. That the serial killer
trope functions to dominate the generic characterisation of the film, despite the term being
replaced by synonyms, shall be demonstrated in reference to the reviews. The press release
barely mentions the bodies of the victims, albeit as masterpieces, but in describing the
settings of each murder scene in relation to the first five capitalised sins and by suggesting the
"authentic and raw" quality of the look of the film it prefigures the graphic description of the
murder scenes and victims found in some of the reviews. In a similarly oblique manner, the
press release constructs the direct link between Se7en andThe Silence of the Lambs by
economic reference to the film in connection with Se7en 's composer Howard Shore who
previously scored this other film. Reference is achieved solely by use of formatting brackets
within an oxymoronic sentence; "Featuring a haunting score by award-winning composer
Howard Shore ( The Silence of the Lambs ), the film is a visual triumph." The statement
awkwardly attempts to conflate the score, the visual style of the film, which had been the
subject of the preceding paragraphs and an implicit comparison with The Silence of the
Lambs , particularly in terms of 'award-winning' quality. That the comparison with The
Silence of the Lambs was anticipated by the marketing team is evidenced by their choice of
review blurbs in the quote ads that ran the week before the U.S. release, which emphasised
comments "comparing the film favourably to 'The Silence of the Lambs '" to complement the
Siskel and Ebert two-thumbs-up evaluation (Matzer, 1996: 15).
Where the serial killer occurs in reviews, invariably with the words "serial killer" which were
notably absent from the press release, it is used to define the genre or subject matter of Se7en
or to qualify the classification of the film as a 'thriller'. As previously suggested, there seems
little or no equivocation within the reviews concerning the films genre except to dismiss the
saliency of the 'buddy-cop' genre or else to suggest a hybridised form. The serial killer trope
is used in more than half the reviews to expressly define genre, either describing a serial
killer genre or else, in the vast majority of reviews, invoking a subgenre of the thriller. This
qualification is made either explicitly, most commonly simply as "serial killer thriller" or
implicitly by combining the definition of the genre as thriller and subject matter as serial
killer. Alternatively, again in over half the reviews, the serial killer is used to define the
subject matter of the film either thematically, as the "concept" (Romney, 1996: 35), or else as
the character subject of the narrative. Genre and subject matter are conflated around the serial
killer trope, often with description of each combined concisely in a single sentence, and
hence the trope contributes significantly to the construction of the persona. In terms of the
ease of description of the film in this way, this conflation relates to the currency of word of
mouth and also to the 'high concept' film. This conflation is also relevant to the utilisation of
theThe Silence of the Lambs trope by the reviews. Frequently The Silence of the Lambs is
referenced by reviews to define Se7en in terms of similarity or difference in respect of genre
or subject matter. Additionally, the character/star unit of the murderer is associated by
reference to Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins). This comparison also functions
evaluatively, either explicitly or else by associating connotations of quality (Oscar winning),
originality or affective horror attached to The Silence of the Lambs (see Jancovich on this
film as 'quality horror', 2001: 35). The subject matter or character of the murderer is
compared more frequently. However, the implicit term of reference for The Silence of the
Lambs is genre with regard to the common conflation of genre and subject matter throughout
the reviews and to a convention of review journalism that identifies genre by association with
another specific film. It is notable, nonetheless, that evaluative comparison of the two films
depends on the vivid recall of features of The Silence of the Lambs or its persona. Hence,
hyperbole such as "the nastiest thriller since The Silence of the Lambs " (Tookey, 1996: 44),
"much more powerful, disturbing and memorable than The Silence of the Lambs " (Davenport,
1996: 20) and "like The Silence of the Lambs , a genuine original" (Malcolm, 1996: 9)
exploits the currency of key aspects of the persona of The Silence of the Lambs and
economically defines Se7en in terms of both difference and similarity across other aspects of
its persona -- genre, subject matter, stars, style and realism. The association between Shore
andThe Silence of the Lambs is mostly implicit, with those reviews that praise Shore's
composition also including reference to The Silence of the Lambs elsewhere in the review text
(Tookey, 1996: 44, Davenport, 1996: 20 and Billson, 1996: 10).
The Dirt, Urban and Rain Tropes
A semantic field operates around several tropes that are related to the darkness trope and a
characterisation of the film as realistic in some sense, albeit stylised. These are the urban
trope, characterising the milieu of the diegetic world both as setting and the isolated urban
situation of the characters, the dirty/decayed trope, characterising the sordid settings of the
murder scenes and the rain trope. Within the reviews these tropes are repeatedly combined
with or subordinated to each other or the darkness trope. Within the press release they are
similarly predominantly figured in combination. The urban trope is treated differently, with
the film's setting being implicitly associated with New York whilst explicitly defined as an
"unidentifiable metropolis". This is motivated in order to authenticate the realism of the film
by relating the diegetic world to the real world experience of the scriptwriter, Andrew Kevin
Walker, who describes New York as a "cauldron of unpleasantries" and that of Arnold
Kopelson, who cites the "danger" of the city. Apart from this contradictory reference, which
functions however to draw attention to the self-consciously "unidentifiable metropolis", all
the references in the press release to the urban, dirty and rain tropes occur together. These
three tropes, repeated by the use of synonyms, antonyms and pleonasm, are combined in
relating the film style and the technical aspects of the production process to the crucial
requirement for realism. They are also each associated with either the visual or metaphoric
sense of darkness; the "large city -- dirty, violent, polluted, and often depressing", the
challenge of creating a "rainy unidentifiable metropolis" equated with co-ordinating "the
eerie look and mood of the film", and the sloth murder scene with its "feel for decay and the
urgent need for cleanliness". In fact, one might suggest that these tropes and that of darkness
activate a complex and extensive clustered semantic field which is used in characterising the
subject matter and the style of the film as well as defining a particular realism. Since these
tropes are combined in the press release, and connoted in the print and TV ads, it is possible
to assign considerable significance to their contribution to the construction of the persona of
the film. These tropes do not relate simply to a conventional genre yet through these and
other tropes of the press release, particularly serial killer, the film's genre is determined
sufficiently for reviewers not to equivocate in classifying the film.
In the reviews, the dominant trope of the semantic field is that of darkness, particularly in
regard to the conflation of visual and metaphoric darkness as analysed above. However, each
review organises the connotations of darkness by combining this trope with these other
supplementary tropes. For example, the most frequent combination pairs darkness and rain to
define the milieu of the film. The urban trope commonly features as a tertiary term in the
cluster, specifying the setting of the film. The city is almost invariably associated with
incessant rain and secondarily, darkness. The urban trope, however, as in the press release, is
distinct in providing two further connotations, that of the unnamed city setting and the
contradictory association with New York. Around half of those reviews which include the
urban trope describe the city as anonymous, whilst similarly, though not exclusively, half
make the connection with New York (the anonymous city features in Andrew, 1996: 62,
Andrews, 1996: 11, Romney, 1995: 35, Higginbotham, 1996: 8, Amidon, 1996: 6 and
French, 1996: 12 whilst New York is named in Andrew, 1996: 62, Malcolm, 1996: 9,
Walker, 1996: 32, Davenport, 1996: 20, Wright, 1996: 21, French, 1996: 12, Sutcliffe, 1996:
7 and Curtis, 1996: 13. Additionally, Sutcliffe, 1996: 7 features reference to "Gotham City"
which combines both readings). Remarkably none of the U.K. newspaper reviews identify the
city as Los Angeles, the shooting location for the production, although even the mainstream
U.S. reviews are mistaken in this respect. The choice of emphasis on either the unnamed city
or New York informs the connotations of the urban trope. The unnamed city is used to
connote a symbolic setting and privileges the relation between style and the darkness
semantic cluster. In contrast, New York is used to denote reality and is hence associated with
realism. The dirt/decay trope generally features as subordinate to the urban trope and directs
the connotation of this trope to realism, especially when featuring alongside the rain trope,
with the synonym "grit" best expressing the association with verisimilitude, realism of the
setting and subject matter (Elliott, 1996: 65). Alternatively, "sordid" (Walker, 1996: 32),
(Tookey, 1996: 44) and "filth" (Davenport, 1996: 20) carry moral overtones. This cluster of
meanings and conceptual units, particularly around the darkness conflation, demonstrate the
heterogeneous nature of the persona. Although some reviews define the film primarily in
terms of style, foregrounding style over content in relation to these tropes whilst others
privilege realism, the persona manages these disparate versions.
David Fincher
David Fincher, the director of Se7en , is predictably privileged by the press release and
marketing campaign. In the poster Fincher is positioned significantly above the film title, "A
film by DAVID FINCHER" and features as a direction credit. The body of the press release
text further establishes the hierarchical relation of the contributing personnel evident in the
persona, privileging the two stars before mentioning any of the other filmmakers. Fincher is
included in the list of filmmakers derived from the credits block of the synopsis, poster and
adverts in the opening of the press release. Subsequently the press release narrativises the
production and pre-production of the film, and so Fincher is referenced after Andrew Kevin
Walker, the originating screenwriter, and Arnold Kopelson, the producer who retained the
director. Kopelson describes Fincher with particular allusion to his "aesthetic". Additionally,
a quotation from Fincher defines the quality of realism in the film. Fincher , then, is used as a
trope to distinguish and understand the style of Se7en and its particular realism. As an author,
at least in the press release whilst clearly not in the reviews, Fincher is subsumed to the
organising contribution of the producer. Fincher is associated with the cinematographer
Darius Khondji in attributing the distinctive look of the film, the use of CCE, and is validated
by a Kopelson quotation for the likeness of the film to an "oil painting". In the section about
the filmmakers, Fincher is given precedence, with cursory reference to Alien3 (1992), his
directorial debut "sci-fi thriller", and his music video background. This serves to preclude any
association between this film and Se7en , although many reviewers compare them in relation
to Fincher's direction and dark aesthetic. The preclusion can be explicated by the relatively
poor box office and critical reception of the Alien sequel.
Throughout the reviews, Alien3 is the most frequently referenced film and invariably is cited
in association with Fincher. Several of the reviews formulate a binary opposition around the
comparison of the two films with Alien3 identified negatively as a failure (although in one
case the blame for this is located with the studio, absolving Fincher) and Se7en contrasted
positively as a success of filmmaking. However, an equal number of reviews derive neutral or
positive associations from Alien3 . Hence, a similarity between the two films is posited,
particularly in terms of darkness and style. Fincher is thus utilised by the reviews to personify
the aesthetic and darkness of Se7en , attributing auteur intention. In fact, Fincher is often used
as the key term of reference in positioning Se7en according to a conventionally perceived
style/realism axis. Notably, Fincher is criticised when style is judged to "overpower reality"
(Elliott, 1996: 65), whilst being validated when the reviewer adjudges "for once, the
stylisation fits the subject-matter" (Billson, 1996: 10). Fincher, then, becomes the locus
around which are organised the aspects of the persona of realism and style and the different
connotations of the cluster around darkness. This focus on Fincher in understanding the style
and realism of the film predicates the way in which the other filmmakers are often subsumed
to the reviews' treatment of the director. The reviews frequently validate Se7en as innovative
or original and associate this with Fincher's fresh authorial vision or attribute this collectively
to Fincher, Khondji and Walker.
Pitt and Freeman
The star pairing of Brad Pitt and Morgan Freeman is privileged by the marketing campaign,
alongside the sins, to summarily define the film. The stars' names feature in the poster and
synopsis and alongside their likeness in all the advertising formats. In the various elements of
the marketing campaign the pairing is constructed with an explicit balance of emphasis and
focus on the contrast between the stars, which parallels the contrast of the characters within
the narrative. Although the credits and biographical details on the two stars are undoubtedly
strictly contractually determined, the press release text manages this balance by associating
each star with specific tropes and aspects of the persona of the film. The extratextual
evidence suggests the stars critical and popular appeal was problematic to the marketing
campaign in being inconsistent with the "psychological thriller" audience for a film of such
"darkness" (Matzer, 1996: 13). The task for the marketing campaign was the coherent and
consistent positioning of the film, developing the darkness, the film's noirish quality and
similarity to The Silence of the Lambs whilst capitalising on the star appeal of Pitt and
Freeman.
The press release contributes to this consistent construction of the persona by explicitly
combining within a single sentence references to Pitt and his Legends of the Fall (1994)
success and Freeman, with the award nomination for The Shawshank Redemption (1994),
with the "mystery-thriller" / "series of murders" subject matter of the film. Although Pitt is
given credit precedence, the press release follows the order of appearance listing by defining
his character/star unit, "Detective David Mills (Pitt)", after that of Freeman. Pitt is
secondarily associated with discourses of realism applied to the film, particularly with respect
to his "physically challenging" role, alluding to a micro-narrative of a much reported arm
injury sustained whilst filming and in connection with his SWAT police training for the role
with connotations of 'method' acting. His biographic listing defines him as a "prominent"
actor, an award nominee and concentrates on contrasting his previous roles. Pitt is defined
primarily as a star, in terms of celebrity, as well as in association with the realism of the film.
"Lt. William Somerset (Freeman)" denotes Freeman's character/star unit and constitutes the
primary term in the contrasting of the two character/star units, creating a bipolar opposition.
Whilst denying the 'buddy-cop' classification for the film Freeman ascribes depth to his
character, constructing a clear explicit parallel with the depth of his own acting by likening
the character to an actor. The background information on Freeman details his own many
awards and nominations, expressively characterising him variously as "extraordinary",
"graceful" and "multitalented" whilst also further emphasising his stage background. Hence
Freeman is primarily defined as an actor with connotations of quality, depth, and experience
and as the key term of a contrast with Pitt.
However, Freeman andPittare primary tropes in the construction of the persona occurring
with equal frequency. Additionally, it is the pairing of the two stars and their character/star
units which is often emphasised by reviews. The contrast described between the two
characters, sometimes conflated with the stars' differences, is used to subsume the buddy
trope. Commonly, tabloid newspapers and middlebrow magazines privilege the stars whilst
broadsheets and specialist or highbrow publications privilege the director. However, Morgan
Freeman transcends this trend, presumably due to the connotations he provides of quality and
acting and dominates some broadsheet reviews. This division is realised in part by the more
likely use of the star interview format or inclusion of star quotations in the popular media
review and the use of directorial citation in the broadsheets and specialist publications.
Clearly, this distinction demonstrates the importance of stars to the popular reach of
promotion, mitigated by the media fascination with celebrity.
In parallel with the press release the reviews develop specific associations around the
character/star units of Pitt and Freeman. The association made by the press release between
Brad Pitt and realism is rarely adopted by the reviews, whilst Se7en is positioned as a Pitt star
"vehicle" (Elliott, 1996: 65). In over half of the reviews Freeman is associated with quality,
as an actor foremost, with particular allusions to qualities such as depth, intelligence and
maturity. Far less frequently do the reviews reference his Oscar and other award wins or else
infer Oscar quality in this part. Since Freeman is defined as mature, intelligent and with depth
of character, the conflation of the contrast between the two characters and the two stars is
eased. Clearly, this is an intentional consequence of the pairing by the production.
Particularly, Freeman dominates the contrast between his acting and that of Pitt but within the
conflation the Somerset character often dominates the contrast with Mills.
Kevin Spacey is credited separately in the press release and his participation in the movie is
downplayed; reviewers are "encouraged not to disclose his participation in the film". Thus,
the reviewers are self-consciously given privileged information which they are encouraged to
conceal or elide in their texts. Clearly this secrecy aspect of the trope has a rhetorical
resonance based on the idea of revelation since if the Doe/Spacey character/star unit was not
thus distinguished it would either be far less notable or might undermine the privileged
pairing of Pitt and Freeman whilst the mysterious identity of the killer and casting of Spacey
invokes a review trope defining the "diabolical killer" (Curtis, 1996: 13).
This attempt to prohibit mention of Spacey, or his role, in the reviews achieved varied
success. Amongst those reviews which feature the serial killer/actor unit, fractionally more
keep the actor unnamed and maintain the enigma although sometimes providing clues to his
identity (Grant, 1996: 35 and French, 1996: 12). Those sceptical reviewers who do reveal the
identity of Spacey are in the minority and either characterise the narrative introduction of the
serial killer as enigmatic (Walker, 1996: 32) or name Spacey in order to compare the serial
killer/actor with Hannibal Lecter (Billson, 1996: 10 and Harry, 1996: 32).
I have suggested that the press release constructs several tropes that inform the persona of the
film. Some of these tropes do not directly correlate with the features of the persona -- genre,
stars, production values -- but I have attempted to analyse the network of meanings that
characterise the film. In addition to those mentioned, the title Se7en constitutes a thematic
trope, an enigma connecting the number of sins, murders and days. The film is constructed as
different, unorthodox and enigmatic by the press release. Arnold Kopelson explicitly suggests
the word of mouth potential for the film; "People who go to this movie will walk out stunned,
numb and eager to discuss this film." This difference is defined in terms of genre or subject
matter, style and production values. To summarise, the dominant tropes of the press release
areSins,Darkness ,Serial killer ,Fincher ,PittandFreeman . I have suggested that genre is
primarily constructed in relation to the serial killer trope, incorporating a direct comparison
with The Silence of the Lambs . Genre is thus partially equated with subject matter. The
conflation of the visual and metaphorical senses of darkness is utilised to combine subject
matter and style, contributing nuance to this generic identity. Further, the privileged attention
to style distinguishes the film in these terms. The sins trope is also used for generic
differentiation. Subordinate tropes within the complex semantic cluster around darkness are
used to position the film in relation to realism. The production values are figured in the
commodified auteur Fincher, used to personify the distinctive aesthetic of the film, its quality
and unorthodoxy. Pitt and Freeman are also used to define the genre by refusing a 'buddy-
cop' genre classification and displacing the contrast between the two character/star units onto
their star aspects.
The definitive tropes that construct the persona are those around the aspects of the
character/stars, style and subject matter/genre. Across the body of reviews particular tropes
featured within the press release recur to dominate the persona. Positive evaluative
connotations of interesting characters and realistic acting are associated with the stars,
particularly Freeman. Subject matter and genre are defined in terms of the serial killer trope
andThe Silence of the Lambs . Reviewers use these to position the film in terms of similarity
and difference, aligned with positive connotations. Style is described by a grouping of tropes,
primarily in terms of difference associated with the darkness trope as well as Fincher. The
darkness trope also combines with the rain, urban and dirt/decay tropes to vividly define the
quality of realism. Secondary aspects of the persona that are still influential in moviegoers'
decisions to see the film are logical story line, production status and production values. These
are each invoked in respect of the production personnel with the production status and values
being related to the stars and director and both Walker and Fincher being associated with the
merits of the narrative, particularly elements of surprise and suspense. Furthermore,
evaluative considerations also relate to the affective aspect of the narrative and the U.K.
reviews predominantly commended this in connection with the storyline and serial killer
subject and in puns on the sins in headlines that recommend seeing Se7en . This affective
aspect might be of prime importance to word of mouth in that the related tropes prepare the
audience but it is "the extent to which [the movie] meets or exceeds the expectations of the
film the viewer carries into the theatre" that determines word of mouth (Earnest, 1983: 14).
The persona informs audience expectations for the film and whether these are met or
exceeded by the film is fundamental to the film's reception.
The notion of film persona, then, provides a model for considering how films are discursively
characterised and the relationship between these characterisations, the film's marketing and
the film itself. Whilst individual characterisations might differ, the multiple and various
characterisations will mobilise shared tropes and areas of interest. The film will be
characterised with subjective emphasis upon genre, stars, auteur or style, for example, with
these factors associated or connected in different ways in each review. Yet, across the body
of discourses particular aspects will be recurrently privileged due to their salience to both the
film and its potential audience and likewise their vividness. These aspects will not necessarily
correspond directly to conventional approaches to film and their respective classificatory
practices, such as genre, stars or auteurism. However, as I have developed in this case study
ofSe7en , they will constitute an extrinsic yet specific means to conceive the film as well as
informing a pragmatic approach to the consumption of the individual film.
References
References to the UK version of the press release for Se7en are taken from the BFI
microfiche for the film. This essay summarises findings of my unpublished M.A. thesis,
Se7en: A Study in Reception , which includes detailed analysis of a wider survey of UK and
US reviews of the film.
Amidon, Stephen (1996) Serial Thriller. Sunday Times , 7 January 1996, sec. 10, pp. 6-7
Andrew, Geoff (1996) Review. Time Out , 3 January 1996, p. 62
Andrews, Nigel (1996) Review. Financial Times , 4 January 1996, p. 11
Barker, Martin and Kate Brooks (1998) Knowing Audiences: Judge Dredd, its Friends, Fans
and Foes . Luton: University of Luton Press.
Barker, Martin, Ramasuami Harindranath and Jane Arthurs (2001) The Crash Controversy:
Censorship Campaigns and Film Reception . London and New York: Wallflower Press.
Billson, Anne (1996) Welcome to the City of Dreadful Night. Sunday Telegraph , 7 January
1996, Review section p. 10
Bordwell, David (1989) Making Meaning: Inference and Rhetoric in the Interpretation of
Cinema . Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: Harvard University Press.
Brett, Anwar (1996) Review. What's On in London , 3 January 1996, p. 33
Brown, Geoff (1996) See it Before You Go Sinning. The Times , 4 January 1996, p. 31
Cameron-Wilson, James (1996) Looking for Mr Badguy. The Times , 2 January 1996, p. 10
Corner, John (1991) Meaning, Genre and Context: The Problematics of 'Public Knowledge'
in the New Audience Studies, in James Curran and Michael Gurevitch (eds.) Mass Media and
Society . London: Edward Arnold.
Curtis, Quentin (1996) Review. Independent on Sunday , 7 January 1996, p. 13
Darke, Chris (1996) Inside the Light, Sight and Sound, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 18-20
Davenport, Hugo (1996) Deadliest of the Serial Sinners. Daily Telegraph, 5 January 1996, p.
Dyer, Richard (1979) Stars . London: British Film Institute.
Dyer, Richard (1999) Seven .BFI Modern Classic , London: British Film Institute.
Earnest, Olen (1983) Star Wars: A Case Study in Motion Picture Marketing, in Bruce Austin
(ed.) Current Research in Film: Audience, Economics and the Law , Volume 1, Norwood,
New Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Elliott, Victoria Stagg (1996) Review. Gay Times, January 1996, p. 65
French, Philip (1996) Arcane and Able. Observer, 7 January 1996, p. 12
Grant, Brigit (1996) Murder in the Dark. Sunday Express, 7 January 1996, Classic Magazine,
p. 35
Harry, Allister (1996) Magnificent Seven. The Voice, 9 January 1996, p. 32
Harry, Allister (1996) Support for All: Morgan Freeman Interview. Evening Voice, 16
January 1996, p. 27
Higginbotham, Adam (1996) David Fincher Interview. Observer, Preview, 7 January 1996,
pp. 7-8
Hodge, Robert and Gunther Kress (1988) Social Semiotics . Oxford: Polity Press.
Jancovich, Mark (2001) Genre and the Audience: Genre Classifications and Cultural
Distinctions in the Mediation of The Silence of the Lambs, in Richard Maltby and Melvyn
Stokes (eds.), Hollywood Spectatorship: Changing Perceptions of Cinema Audiences .
London: BFI.
Johnston, Sheila (1996) Sin Has Seldom Looked So Good. Independent, 4 Janary 1996, sec.
2, p. 8
Klinger, Barbara (1989) Digressions at the Cinema: Reception and Mass Culture, Cinema
Journal, vol.28, (4)
Klinger, Barbara (1994) Melodrama and Meaning: History, Culture and the Films of
Douglas Sirk . Bloomington and Indianopolis: Indiana University Press.
Leith, William (1996) Vicious roomers, The Mail on Sunday, Night and Day, 7 January 1996,
p. 27
McLeod, Dan (1995) Brad Company, Time Out, 20 December 1995, pp. 16-18
Malcolm, Derek (1996) Review, Guardian, 4 January 1996, sec.2, p. 9
Matzer, Maria (1996) Selling Seven: Case Study on the Marketing of New Line's Se7en,
Hollywood Reporter, Movies and the Media Special Issue, vol. 342, no. 42, pp.13-15
Newman, Kim (1996) The Fine Art of Killing, Independent, 1 February 1996, pp. 10-11
Romney, Jonathan (1996) Textual Tension from the Director of Alien3, New Statesman and
Society, 5 January 1996, p. 35
Schroder, Kim Christian (1994) Audience Semiotics, Interpretive Communities and the
Ethnographic Turn in Media Research, Media, Culture and Society, vol.16, no.2
Schroder, Kim Christian (2000) Making Sense of Audience Discourses: Towards a
Multidimensional Model of Mass Media Reception, European Journal of Cultural Studies ,
vol.3, no.2
Staiger, Janet (1986) The Handmaiden of Villainy: Methods and Problems in Studying the
Historical Reception of a Film, Wide Angle, vol.8, no.1
Staiger, Janet (1992) Interpreting Films: Studies in the Historical Reception of American
Cinema . New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Staiger, Janet (1993) Taboos and Totems: Cultural Meanings of The Silence of the Lambs, in
Jim Collins, Hilary Radner and Ava Preacher (eds.), Film Theory Goes to the Movies . New
York: Routledge.
Sutcliffe, Thomas (1996) Seven Ways to Satisfy an Appetite for Violent Death, Independent,
Weekend section, 20 January 1996, p.7
Taubin, Amy (1995) Built for Sin, Village Voice, 3 October 1995, p.82
Taubin, Amy (1996) The Allure of Decay, Sight and Sound, vol.6, no.1, pp.23-4
Tookey, Christopher (1996) Nasty, Sordid, Gruesome, but a Sin to Miss this Hit, Daily Mail,
5 January 1996, p.44
Walker, Alexander (1996) Shock of the Serial Sinner, The Evening Standard, 4 January 1996,
p.32
Wright, Steve (1996) Review, The Sun, 5 January 1996, p.21
Wyatt, Justin (1994) High Concept: Movies and Marketing in Hollywood . Austin: University
of Texas Press.
Filmography
Alien3 , 1992. Dir. David Fincher. 20thCentury Fox.
Legends of the Fall , 1994. Dir. Edward Zwick. Columbia/TriStar.
Se7en , 1995. Dir. David Fincher. New Line.
The Shawshank Redemption , 1994. Dir. Frank Darabont. Columbia/TriStar.
The Silence of the Lambs , 1990. Dir. Jonathan Demme. Orion.
