40658383.pdf
https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/40658383.pdf?refreqid=fastly-default%3Ac70f4034e6d5a730438b79dace7b99f8&ab_segments=&initiator=&acceptTC=1

Accessibility support:
If you experience accessibility issues with this file, report them here IT'S THE END OF THE WORLD AS WE KNOW IT AND I FEEL FINE": MORALITY, THEOLOGY"
AND POLITICS IN SEVEN
Author(s): STEPHEN MILLIGEN
Source: Irish Journal of American Studies , 2004/2005 , Vol. 13/14 (2004/2005), pp. 149-166
Published by: Irish Association for American Studies
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/40658383
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
.facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
This content is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (CC BY 4.0). To view a copy of this
license, visit
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Irish Journal of American Studies
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
STEPHEN MILLIGEN UNIVERSITY OF ULSTER AT JORDANSTOWN
"IT'S THE END OF THE WORLD AS WE KNOW IT
AND I FEEL FINE":
MORALITY, THEOLOGY AND POLITICS IN SEVEN
During the presidencyof Ronald Reaganin the 1980s the "serial" sex
killer emerged as a dominant figure in American popular culture. Credited with
superhumanintellect and abilities the "serial" killer was accused of attacking
thetraditional values underpinning American societyin a decade markedby
conservativepoliticsandresurgentfundamentalist Protestantism. After
Reagan'selectionvictorythefocusof popular debate shifted awayfrom
tangible social problemssuchasthe environment, unemploymentand civil
rights. In the"new morning" inAmerica promised by Reagan, symbolic attacks
onabortion, pornography,and theteaching of evolution in schools took
priority (see Johnson, 193-214; Dallek; and Berman, 60-118).
In Reagan's opinion,there had been a breakdown in the American
criminaljustice system, "It just plain isn't working.All toooften,repeat
offenders ...are robbing, raping and beating with impunity and...quite literally
getting awaywith murder," he argued. A change was needed, accordingto
Reagan,towinthe"Waron Crime." It was timetoseecrimeasamoral
problem requiring a spiritual solution. Describing murder as "objectively evil"
he stated"right and wrong matters; individuals areresponsible for their
actions; [and] Retribution should be swift and sure for thosewho prey on the
innocent" ("Remarks," 840-41, 844). Echoing rhetoric from earlier in his own
career as well as that of conservatives such as Barry Goldwater, Richard Nixon
and J.EdgarHoover, his speeches rangwith an Old Testament zeal.
It is this era that David Fincher's filmSeven critiques, exposingthe
human consequences of naivety and political romanticism. By considering the
film's literary and cinematic intertexts this paper argues that Seven examines the
consequences for society of the unrealistic andinhuman ideology espoused by
conservative Christian demagoguesforcenturies, and mostrecently by
Reagan's New Rightofthe Republican partyin the 1980s. In the scriptfor
Sevenno specificdateis givenfor the commencement ofthe crimes, but the
decor and clothes make it obvious that it is set in the late twentieth century.
Thefilm went into production in 1995 but the script had been soldfive years
before (circa 1990),and had been completed some time before that. It can
fairly be assumed, then,that the film isset during the time it was written, in the
late 1980s. This is reinforced by thescriptnotes,which indicate that Doe
began to preparefor his crimes five years priortothe discovery of murdered
shut-in. Thissuggeststhat Doe was at work from theearlytomid-1980s.
Walker has also noted in interviews that hewas writing aboutthesociety he
149
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
150IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
saw around him. The social and economic conditions ofthel980s developed as
a consequence of neglect and decay spanning generations, but during Reagan's
administration policies focused ondefence spending and tax cuts rather than
social spending. Individualgreed took precedence overcollective well-being.
Following the flight to the suburbs after1950,inner citieswere depicted in film
as increasingly threatening environments by conservative rhetoric.
"Serial" killersare usually,but falsely, described by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation (FBI) as highlymobile white males,sexually motivated killers
who select their "innocent" victims at random and who will continue their
careers in crime untiltheyarecaughtor killed. Aftergaining academic
qualifications in psychology the Behavioural Science Unit profilers abandoned
all of the definitions andterminologywhichtheyhad beentaught, and
constructed their ownsimplistic paradigmforpersonality types.When
conductinginterviews with incarcerated offenders they intentionally selected a
handful of high profile criminals, along with a number of other criminals who
werenot necessarily murderers, to aidtheir subsequent public relations. The
profilesreflect more about FBIprioritiesthantheydo about the nature of
"serial" crime.The profilers went looking solely for sexual motives for crimes
and applied a naive Freudian analysistotheir findings.In a number of cases,
such asthe Vampire of Sacramento, the FBI tried to take credit in retrospect
for solving cases in which their profiles played virtually no part. Inother cases,
such as the Atlanta Child Murders, theyaltered their profileto match the
description ofa suspect once one was identified. The profiles presentedto
police are virtually useless because they areso vague and general. FBI profilers
arenot investigators, they do not visitcrime scenes, they are not scientists, and
inanumber of courtcases ithasbeen ruled thattheyarenot qualifiedto
deliver testimony about captured suspects. The killers were claimed to select
theirvictims randomly to heighten public insecurity, and emphasise individual
vulnerability. No statistical analysis was presented by the FBI,and the numbers
of victims claimed by "serial" killers eachyear,and the number of active
"serial" killers in America, were distortedby attributingall of the unsolved
homicides fora year (5,000) to "serial" killers.By assumingthat each killer
killed10 people a year,they arrived at 500 as the number of active "serial"
killers.The realityof "serial" killers has provedto be very different from the
FBI profile as theyhave been foundto kill people they know, remain static,kill
across racial boundaries and have been motivated by factors other than sex
(see Milligen).
Thedefinition popularized by the Bureau is politically motivated, and
was implemented at a time when the FBIwas trying to rebuild its bureaucratic
credibilityafter revelations in the 1970s of involvement in civilrights abuses,
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 151
COINTELPRO, andthe Watergatescandal. The emergenceof "serial" sex
killers as a"new" phenomenon,with the offenders usuallyaged between 20
and 35,subtly identified these unique killers asa product of the social changes
brought aboutby Lyndon Johnson's "Great Society" programs and the
liberalization of social values in the 1960s, symbols which Reagan and other
conservatives zealously opposed. However, according toElliot Leyton, "If we
werechargedwith theresponsibilityfordesigningasocietyin which all
structural and cultural mechanisms leaned towards the creation of the killers of
strangers, we could do no better thanto present the purchaser with the shape
of modern America" (375). Ironicallythe NewRight ideologywhich
dominated in the1980s originatedin the 1950s as a backlash against the New
Dealpolicies, especially thoseseekingtoregulate business anddevelop a
welfare system forthe poor.
According toRobert Ressler, one of themost prominent FBI profilers,
"What my colleagues and I have done is designa little expertise ...looking beyond
what the conventional police investigator sees"(Emphasisadded. Ressler
quotedin Goldman, The X-Files Book of the Unexplained:Volume Tipo:62).In
doingso he andhis colleagues,whilenever actually investigating anyof the
casesthey profiled,became a hybridof the classic fictional detective and the
hard-boiled action detective, establishing a dramatic imagefor the "new" FBI.
The imageof the "new" FBIwas depictedin books, films and on TV, most
notablyin the crime fiction of Thomas Harris. The film Silence of theÌMtnbs
(Jonathan Demme, 1991) wasthe highpoint ofFBI propaganda, depicting the
Bureau in the most favorable and dynamic light possible.
While in office Ronald Reagan was reportedto have remarked to his
friend Jerry Falwell,"I sometimes believe thatwe're heading veryfast for
armageddon right now"(Falwell quotedinKrupey, "The ChristianRight,
Zionism, andthe Coming ofthePenteholocaust," inParfrey(Ed.)Apocalypse
Culture.289).Thisidea shaped many ofhis policies,of which the "serial" sex
killer proved a suitable symbolic harbinger. Foreshadowingtheimpending
apocalypse,thecinematic "serial" killerwas epitomized by thegrandiose
Hannibal Lecter of Manhunter (Michael Mann,1986) and Silenceof the luimbs,
and Lucian Morrano in Señal Killer (Pierre David, 1995).These characters taunt
investigatorswith theirsuperior intellect, but JohnDoe in Seven(David
Fincher, 1996) elevates the killer to the status of a deluded and fanatical
religiousmoralist withmessianic aspirations. Contemporary critics missed the
significanceof the obviousliterary and cinematic references in Seven and it
openedin the USin September1995to poorreviews, but it still shot to
number one at the box office and became one of the most successful films of
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
152IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
theyear.Fincher never intended tomakeablockbuster film,instead he
envisioned Seven as asmall project:
I always thoughtthat there would be an audience for this
picture.I always believed that themost healthy wayto
perceive theentire exercise, and I said this to Brad Pitt and
we agreed on it, was to doa strong, singular minor note. It
wasn't supposedto be the be all and endall of everybody's
career. It was let'sdo something that we have the clout to
get the financing, doit well,and do it withas much passion
as we can. ("Killer Movie," 35)
The film contrasts an experienced blackdetective, William Somerset
(Morgan Freeman), witha naive, crusading white detective, David Mills(Brad
Pitt),who has just moved to thecity with hiswife Tracey (Gwyneth Paltrow).
However, departingfrom the conventional "good"versus "evil"narrative,
screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker, an admitted fan of what he called "the
cinemaof discomfort," (Walker qtd. Salisbury, "Butcher" 12) invoked elements
ofclassical literature, theology, popularculture and contemporary politicsto
createa disturbing morality tale rather than a conventional Hollywood product.
Uninterested in makinga blatantly commercial mainstream film, David Fincher
wanted to direct a film that would havean impact on theaudience, reflecting
hisown preferencein films. As he toldone interviewer, "I don't know how
much movies should entertain. [...] I'm always interested in movies that scar1'
(Fincher qtd. Salisbury, "Seventh Hell,"83). The scriptforSeven appealedto
Fincher because it was "so ruthless":
I got 20 pagesinto it andI thought, "Oh God,it's justa
buddy movie,and it's like I'm thelast person in the world
to do one, because I don't understand them, but then all of
a sudden it tookthis turn,and Ifound myself getting more
andmore trappedin this kindof evil, and although I felt
uncomfortable aboutbeingthere,I had to keep going
(Fincher qtd. Salisbury, "Seventh Hell," 81)
When Fincher read the script he knewJohn Doe was a"bad guy,"but he also
questioned David Mills's character, andwanted William Somerset to"stop
whining anddo something." Reading on hefound himself becoming involved
with the "intellectual drama" ofthe screenplay, andwas impressedthat the
friction which was created "was the friction ofideas colliding with each other,
as opposed to shooting people" ("Killer Movie," 34).
Fincher wanted the film to be tough;as forthe audience, "you don't
have any control over this,you're justalongfor the ride"(Fincher qtd.
Salisbury, "Seventh Hell," 82).Hehadamuchmore realistic idea of what
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 153
"serial" killers do andhow theydo it than most ofhis contemporariesin
Hollywood:
[W]hen you start doing research on serialkillers, these
peopledon't prey on senators, they pick off the weak and
the stragglers and the runaways andthe prostitutes and the
people hitchhiking, and people unfortunate enough to be at
a 7-Eleven at two o'clock inthe morning. It takesplace in a
very dark world, and so it just seemed like the darkness was
morein keeping with making a horror movie.
("Seventh Hell," 87)
After initially sellingthescript,and long before David Fincher became
involved, Andrew Kevin Walker moved toLos Angeles. Inthe following five
yearshe rewrote the endingatthe request of a director whohad previously
been involved inthe project. Thefilm's producer Arnold Kopelson also told
Walker that he would never allow the original "head-in-the-box" ending to be
filmed, but when David Fincher was approachedto direct the film he was
accidentallysenta copyof theoriginal script,and not the rewritten one.
Fincher requested Morgan Freeman to be cast as Somerset. The producers
were reluctant until Pitt made itclear how much he would like to work with
Freeman - then the studio cast him.The producers were apparently not fully
aware of whatthe script was about and had concerns thatthe pairing of Pitt
and Freeman might be comparedto Mel Gibson and Danny Glover in the
series ofUthal Weapon films ("Killer Movie," 34-35).
After reading the original and revised drafts Fincher, with the support of
Morgan Freeman and Brad Pitt, convinced Kopelson to reinstate the original
ending.Pitt even went tothe lengths of having itwritten into his contract that
the studio couldnot change the ending, (Salisbury, "Butcher,"12) and Walker
acknowledged that hewas surprised his original ending hadbeen accepted: "I
was totally spoiled on this film-who would have thought they would letme get
awaywith it?It will never be likethat again" (Westbrook 86). The ending is
much more thanan attempt to shock the audience and produce a sensational
finale;it is a crucial subversion of Dante's DivineComedy, a key theme in the
film.
The storytakesplace overone week,atime period which resonates with
the film's key intertexts. Sevendaysis,of course, the duration of biblical
creation; the journey through Hell to Paradise in Dante's DivineComedyis
completedin the course of a week. The sevendays also correspondto the
seven deadly sins which inform the film's title. Within the film,the week marks
William Somerset's last sevendaysbefore retirement, and David Mills's first
seven as a Metro homicide detective. For Mills the week constitutes a riteof
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
154IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
passage with Somerset as a "reluctant mentor ...with ahumanist understanding
of history." (Täubin, 23). Initially, two seemingly unconnected murders are
reportedbut theexperiencedSomerset soon deduces that a killer is
"preaching" and each murder is a "sermon" being carried out as a punishment
for theindividuals transgressing and committing one of theSeven Deadly Sins.
Thekiller,who iseventuallyidentified asJohn("Jonathan") Doe(Kevin
Spacey), uses the Sins asa blueprint forhis crimes, taking conservative moral
theology as hisapocalyptic inspiration. A note left by the killer forthe
detectives warns them of what is to comeand provides whatis perhapsthe
most pertinent comment in the film.It reads,"Long isthe way, / And hard,
that out of hell leads up to light" (Milton, Paradise L^ost, Book 21.432). But in a
culture of individual greed,which is regulated by a retributive criminal justice
system yetin which the continuing socio-economic causes of crime remain
untended, there are no long-term solutions.
Fourkeyintertextsunderpin the action: Dante'sPurgatoryfrom the
Divine Comedy, thebiblical relationship between David and Jonathan recounted
inI and II Samuel, Frank Capra'sfilm MeetJohn Doe (1941),and "The Parson's
Tale," a sermon on theSeven Deadly Sins fromChaucer's Canterbury Tales. Out
of these sources an unusual and compelling a critique of theology and
contemporary society is formed. In his bookSeven (1998),Richard Dyer notes a
few of the film's obvious cultural references, rangingfrom classical to
postmodern, but dismissively comments that "we don't need to knowany of
these references to follow the film." He alsomakes condescendingremarks
about the film's general audience not understanding its high cultural references
(72-73), yet he himself fails to seetheir significance.
The FBI,the self-proclaimedauthorities on "serial" murder, appears
only fleetingly in Seven via a clandestine program which they operate in public
libraries. Books that are considered to appealto the criminal mindare flagged
andthe names of anyone who borrows such books are added to a list. This list
provides Somerset and Mills witha group of suspects, and leads them to one
"Jonathan Doe." AnFBI program called the "Library Awareness Program"
was operatedin New York public libraries for atime,monitoringcertain
scientific and technical journalsthat theBureau suspected might be of use to
foreign spies.It was claimed thatthe program produced very little useful
information and thatthe practice was an intrusion on First Amendment rights
of American citizens (Kessler 114-15). Similarly police officers investigating
"cult" related crimes in the 1970s made use of library information to identify
suspects, a method which has become common practice. In the late 1980s self-
styled cult "expert" DaleW. Griffis,a retired police Captain from Tiffin, Ohio,
recommended that police officers should contact publiclibraries to gather
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 155
namesof patrons who borrowed books related to the occult (Hicks, 55, 369-
371). The ideaof using libraryrecords to catch a "serial" killer was also based
on real events. In 1990detectives investigatingthe Zodiac Killer,a "serial"
sniperin New YorkCity,obtained asubpoenaforlibrary records of
individualsrecently requesting books by Aleister Crowley, a twentieth-century
occultist, whowas thought to have inspired thekiller ("Library Files").
By suggestingthat Mills and Somerset could use sucha program to
check references as commonplace as Dante andThomas Aquinas implies these
"classic" books are potentially dangerous reading because of the ideasthey
contain, most notablytheir discussions of sin. This isironic considering the
ideology of these books forms the basis of the conservative morality promoted
by theFBI, Reagan and the New ChristianRight,whowere engaged on a
moral crusadeagainst political dissent, pornography,and sexual deviance
throughout the 1980s.
Unlike theFBI,which thrives onpublicity andhigh-profile
investigations,MillsandSomerset areunder pressureto solve thecrimes,
pressurewhich is increased when District AttorneyMartinTalbot (Richard
Roundtree) assures the news media thatthe investigation would be "thevery
definition of swiftjustice." Thisreflects thedifficulties facedby police
departmentsin large modern cities,especiallyafterRonald Reagan's budget
cuts.
In Seven, the journey through Purgatory depictedin Dante's epic poem
TheDivineComedyis relocated to anurban metropolis to providethe main
structure ofthefilm'snarrative, with the twodetectives, David Mills and
William Somerset, takingon the roles ofDanteandVirgil respectively.
Whereas the complex planof Dante'sInfernois takenfrom pagan writers,
mainly Aristotle andCicero, Purgatory derives from theChristian tradition, and
ismuch simpler (Holmes 72). Danteand Virgil emerge fromthe underground
Inferno on an island at the base ofa mountain, and Earthly Paradise is at the
summit of themountain, their final destination. ThejourneyfromHell,
through the Terraces of Purgation, and onto Earthly Paradise, takes onlyone
week in The Divine Comedy, whichcorrespondsto the duration of Mills and
Somerset's dysfunctional working relationship.Both Dante's poemand
Fincher's film enact the course of one man's journey to God,but whereas in
the medieval text beatitude is achieved, Fincher's version pointedly depicts a
much grimmer outcome.
In Dante's poem, Terraces of Purgation are where sinners are punished
for theirtransgressions. In both thescreenplay and thefilm,these are
symbolically re-enacted ina citythatremains nameless, allowing itto become a
generic location. Doe's crimes could be committed in anylarge American city
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
156IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
with a decaying infrastructure and anonymous population.After the white
exodus from inner cities in the 1950s these sections became"grim holding
area [s] for the nation'ssuperfluous people, its poor, its minorities, its elderly,
its incompetent, its pathological'"
(Steigerwald 188). The setting is a hellish
metropolis, "a nameless warrenof dampcorridors, subterranean sex joints and
dilapidated tenements, where it rains all thetime" (Wrathall 50).Inthis living
hell "manis corrupt and citiesare cesspools of contagion" (Täubin 23); the city
harbors atrulyhorrificdecaying anddepraved societythat evokes the
atmosphere of Sodom andGomorrah. In the words of onecritic,the film
"creates an overwhelming sense ofunease, presenting a world of irredeemable
ugliness, a grim,melancholic, depressing and decaying societyfrom which
there isno escape" (Salisbury, "Seven," 29). This contrastssharplywith the
Utopian ideal of small town America that originated in Jeffersonian democracy
andwas subsequently romanticized by numerouspoliticians, and used as a
powerful symbol by the Republican New Rightof the 1980s. Books such as
Luc Sante's LowUfe (1992) and Timothy Guilfoyle's Cityof Eros(1992)
document the criminal and sleazy underside of New YorkCityfrom the late
eighteenthto theearlytwentiethcentury, showingthat the Sodom and
Gomorrah which JohnDoe sees in the late twentiethcenturyis not a new
development; rather, it isa predictable consequence of Westerncapitalist
civilization.
ForThomas Aquinas, one of John Doe'sinfluences, the purpose of
human states was to create a framework within which Christian life could be
conducted. Human law was, within limits,the application of divinelaw. During
Aquinas'lifetime Christians pessimistically conceived the world as beingfull of
corruption. History was a tale of mankind's failure andthe triumph of faith,
thepitfalls of sin withthe possibility of redemption. In hisworks Aquinas
promoted the idea that the state was the very highest achievement possible by
mankind and one thatcould transfigure the earthly society into a Heaven on
earth. However, moral failings and sin could turn it into Hell on earth.
Dante was also deeply influencedby Aquinas' ideas,and in The Divine
Comedy the breakdown ofmoral religious order is as much of a concern to the
poetas it isto John Doe in Seven. Onthe journey through Purgatory Marco,
Lombardo tells Dante why the worldhas gonebad:
On Rome, that brought the world to knowthe good,
once shone two sunsthat lighted up two ways:
the road of this world and the road of God.
The one sun hasputout the other's light
the sword is now one with the crook - and fused
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 157
together thus,must bring about misrule,
since joined, now neither fears the other one.
(Purgatorio, Canto XVI:106-12)
The fear of moral decline is not uniquetolate twentieth-century America;
indeed, ithas remained a persistent societal concern across the centuries since
Dante's death.However, oneobvious developmentin this areaof thinking
over the yearshasbeen the replacement/ supercession of the belief that "evil"
could be identifiedthrough physical characteristicsby the pseudo-science of
psychology.In Eusebii Caesarinsisepiscopichronicon (1512),Johannes Multivallis
related thesymbolic physical deformities of the Monster of Ravenna to
particular moral failings:
The horn [indicates] pride; the wings, mental frivolity and
inconsistency;the lackof arms,alack of good works; the
raptor's foot,rapaciousness, usury andeverysort of
avarice; theeye onthe knee,a mental orientation solely
towardearthly things;the double sex, sodomy. And on
account ofthese vices,Italyis shattered by the sufferings
of war, which the king of France hasnot accomplished by
hisown power, but only asthe scourge ofGod. (Multivallis
qtd.in Daston and Park, Wonders and theOrder of Nature
1150-1750:182)
Sin, not military power,is thefanciful explanation givenby Multivallis for the
French domination of sixteenth -century Italy.
In a similar waysinwas singled out in 1980s America as the source of
crime, poverty andmanyother socialills.TheNew Right was returningto
superstitious medieval thought to explain social problems rather than looking
atempiricalrealities. However, aberrant psychology,rather thanphysical
deformity, wasthemanifestation ofsininthe1980s.While theexternal
appearanceof "serial" killers wasunexceptional,beneath the surface lay
unimaginable "evil" and depravity which threatened all of society. Along with
conservative Christians, theNew Right used thesocial,moral and economic
decline of America asindicators thatbiblical propheciesin Revelation
signallingthe second coming of Christ were to be fulfilled imminently. The
rhetoricalstrategyisnotunlike that implemented by Dantewho,in his own
era, adapted the apocalyptic imagery of Revelation toactual history to indicate
corruption (Purgatorio, Canto XXXII).
Virgil guided Dante through theTerraces of Purgation,where the sinful
did penancefor theirsins,and in Seventhe mysteriouskiller forces his victims
toatone for their sins. In the sixteenthcentury "atonement" replaced
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
158IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
"onement" asa theological term to describe the process of reconciling two
estranged parties.In the film Somerset describes Doe'smurders as"forced
atonement," an oxymoron that highlightsthe difference between the killer's
stated philosophy and his actions.
Somerset is Mills's guide throughthe seamy underworld ofthe city and
the series of perverse and brutal, but symbolic, murders. Mills repeatedly tries
to denyhis naivete by emphasizing that he has spent yearsonthe streets, but it
is Somerset'sinsights and not his that advance theinvestigation. In the
shooting script, it is Somerset who establishes who is in chargewhenhe says,
"Let me tell youhow I want this to go.I want you to look, and I want you to
listen." When Somersetexplainsto Millsthe significance of eachsin,he is
adopting the role of Virgil, the experienced and knowledgeable voice of human
reason.
Somerset is world-weary and reticent about his isolation. His yearsas a
cop have jaded his outlook tothe point where, with his retirement pending, he
says:"I just don't think I can continue to live ina placethat embraces and
nurturesapathy as if it were avirtue."Althoughhe sympathizes with those
whoadopt apathyasasolution to thedrudgery ofday-to-day life,he
concludes, "lovecosts.Ittakes effortandwork." Inaculture governed by
apathy and greed the determination to makea caring society is unlikelyto be
found. "Love" wasa topic of interest for Dante. Inhis youth, he and a circle of
young poetswith whom he was associated in Tuscany were involved in an
exchange of ideas, their main subjects being the pursuit of truth and the love of
God. In their discussions "love" was a natural craving and a dominant force in
human nature. However, they did not view it as aforce purely for "good", and
in Purgatorio Virgil ends a lesson to Danteby warning, "Now may be plain to
thee how hidden is the truth for those who maintain that every love is in itself
praiseworthy, perhaps because its matter alwaysseemsgood;butnot every
stamp is good,even if itbe goodwax"{Divine Comedy:2Purgatorio, 233).
Misguided love is a destructive force. It is distorted love that causes the Seven
Deadly Sins,and for both Mills and Doe it is the love of unattainable ideals
which causes their destruction.
Methodical and organized, Somerset is realistic enoughto know that
when they do catch the killer he will not be theDevil incarnate, he willonly be
a man. Somerset is not an actionhero; rather,he is a witness tothe decay
around him. Detective Somerset's name probably pays homage to the author
William Somerset Maugham (1874-1965) who wrote Of Human Bondage (1915).
The novel is mentioned in Sevenand Maugham is one of Walker's favorite
writers. Of Human Bondage was not popular with contemporary readers because
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 159
itis ableak story, and was released during WW I when the audience wanted to
be reassured and cheered up.
Contrastingwith Somerset's detached cerebralstyle of investigation,
Mills favours the action detective approach. He isa naive,young idealist who
believes he canmake a difference, and is more enthusiastic about takingup the
role ofthe dynamic action detective than carryingout the mundane footwork
that builds aninvestigation. WhileSomerset ispatientand researches
studiously inthe library Mills relies on York Notes for theedited highlights of
literary classics, but even then his frustration boils over and in one outburst he
shouts "Goddam Dante, poetrywritin'faggot pieceof shit." When Mills
participatesinthe investigation itis usually inviolent situations, or illegalacts.
Forinstance, after the Sloth murder Millsloseshistemperwith apress
photographer; in responseSomerset says sarcastically "it's impressiveto see a
man feedingoff his emotions." Foolishly shoutinghis own name after the
photographer,Mills isso caught up in his frustration he does not realize he has
just met thekiller. Ultimately itisMills's self-deluding optimism and idealistic
conservative naivete that enables Doe to fulfillhis own twisted religious
sermon.
Doe tauntsMills during the confusion of theirfinal conversation, telling
him that he has visited his apartment and "tried to play husband" with Tracy,
in order to "live the life ofa simple man." Revealing that "Envy" is his own sin
Doe continues togoad Mills,telling himthat Tracy's head is in the box that
has just been delivered to Somerset. The final straw is the revelation that not
onlyhas Doe killedTracybut her unborn child as well,and that Mills was
unaware ofher pregnancy until that moment. Somerset tries in vain to prevent
Millsfrom avenging his wife and child but, faced with the manwho destroyed
hisfamily,Mills losessight of justiceand the law. His naive beliefs are
shattered and his misguided love, whichwas previously seen in his emotional
outbursts of frustration, explodes. Exercisingthe OldTestament self-righteous
"eyeforan eye" philosophy of a higher law, as endorsed by theNew Right,he
executes Doe for his crimes and fulfils his messianic prophecy. The conclusion
of Seven leaves no doubt in the audience's mind that Mills has succumbed to
Doe's plan, and for his sin of "Wrath" he too must be punished.
"Tracy"isa contemporaryabbreviated form of "Beatrice," the name
Dante gave to his muse. Bici Portinari met Dante in 1274 when they were both
about 9yearsold. He called her"Beatrice", which means "bringer of
blessings." Inhis poemsshe is a modelof courtesy and virtue. However she
did not marry Dante. Instead she became the wife of a banker and died in 1290
aged24. Im Vita Nuova ("New Life")is a collection of 31 ofthe poemsDante
wrote to her.
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
160IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
Thereare many descriptions of Beatrice in Im VitaNuova, emphasizing
her positive characteristics. According to Dante she was"All gentlenessand
humility" (Chapter XXI),and"A lady, youthful and compassionate, Much
graced with qualities of gentleness" (Chapter XXIII). In chapter twenty-six of
1mVita Nuova, Dante writes:
So deeply tobe reverenced, so fair,
My lady is when she hersmile bestows,
All soundof speaking falters to a close
And eyes which would behold her do not dare.
Of praises sung of her sheis aware,
Yet clad insweet humility she goes.
A thing from heaven sent,to all she shows
A miracle which the world may share.
Her beauty entering the beholder's eye
Brings sweetness tothe heart, all sweets above:
None comprehends who does not know this state;
And from her lips there seems to emanate
A gentle spirit,full of tender love,
Which to the soul enraptured whispers: "Sigh!"
(Reynolds trans.,ImVita Nuova, 76)
These characteristics are clearly present in Tracy Mills. According to Lawrence
Coupe, Beatrice, and thereforeTracy, represents"the ultimate powerof
Christian grace" (113),but Doe triesto "play husband," suggestinghe has
rapedor sexually assaulted her,and then beheads her. AsDoe's speechis
specifically aimed at goading Mills to become Wrath it maynotbe entirely true.
It targets sensitivesubjectsthat Doe knowswill produce thedesired response.
The "ultimate power of Christian grace," and thereby the hopeforthe future,
is obliterated by Doe'sfanatical philosophy and actions.
In Purgatorio (Canto XXX) Beatrice challenges Dante and reminds him
ofhis unworthiness, and later she forces him to admit that after her death he
was distracted fromthe proper path by "ft] he present thingswith their false
pleasure" (Canto XXXI: 34-35).In Seven,Mills is distracted fromhis pathof
upholdingthe law by his misguided love in the formof £iWrath", and just
before he executes the killer of his wife a frame of Tracy flashes on-screen for
an instant. While Virgil, the paganRoman poet, guides Dante through Hell and
Purgatory,it isBeatrice, whom Dante adores, whoguideshimthrough
Heaven. Inhis poemsDante is captivated by Beatrice's head,her face and her
hair,and she becomes an icon of all heaspires towards, butthat image is
subverted when Tracy's decapitated head is delivered to the detectives in Seven.
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 161
Symbolically pregnantwiththe hopeof thenext generation,she has been
negated by Doe,andwith Tracy dead there is no oneto guideMills onward.
John Doe's full name, however, does not comefrom Dante; rather he
takes his name fromthe "Everyman" character inFrank Capra's1941 film Meet
JohnDoe. Inthat film,aftera newspaper campaign, Doe is falsely promoted as a
spokesmanfor the common man,and the name entered thepopular
vocabulary to designate an "Everyman" character."John Doe" provideda
powerful symbolic character and police agencies quickly adoptedthe term to
refertothe corpsesof unidentified murder victims. Director FrankCapra is
oftenpresented as aNew Deal liberal, but he was not. When asked about his
work by latter day fans Capra offered a vague, humanist interpretation, one
thatwas designed not to disturb. He often made comments such as,"I wanted
to glorify the average man,not theguyatthe top,notthe politician,not the
banker, just the ordinary guy whose strength I admire." However, he evaded
any closer questioning about his films orhis personal beliefs and he did not
like his filmsbeingclosely scrutinized (McBride: 257-58). Caprawas a lifelong
Republican whoadmired Richard Nixon, played golfwithBarryGoldwater
and Gerald Ford,andwhen Reagan waselected president in1980 Capra sent
himatelegramofcongratulations. (McBride, 257) Throughouthiscareer
Reagan,and numerous other members of the New Right,triedtopresent
themselves to voters in their election campaignsas similar "Everyman"
characters who entered politicsto serve the best interests ofthe public. Capra,
along with Reagan,Millsand JohnDoe, shared a belief in the agrarian myth,
idealizingsmall-town America while being cynically suspiciousof urbancity
environments (McBride 253).
Adoptingthe role of theheroic Everymanin the1960s,Reagan, a
"citizen politician"assured of hisown righteousness, began to build his image
as a credible political candidate, waitingfor his chance in thespotlight.
Mocking Reagan's "citizen politician" campaign slogan Governor Ed "Pat"
Brown said, "This is your citizenpilot,I'veneverflown a plane before but
don't worry. I've always had a deep interest in aviation" (Boyarsky 40). Public
service isthe Everyman'ssacrifice for society. JohnDoe inSeven, like his
namesake in MeetJohnDoe,offers his death as a sacrifice for society.In Meet
JohnDoe itis because of the stateof government politics,in Seven itis because
of the moral decline of society.
InSeven,as Doe directs Mills and Somerset to an unspecified location,
Somerset tries to find out more about Doe,who he is andwhy heis killing.It
quickly becomes apparentthat Doe believes he is workingforsome higher
cause and that his actions will have significant repercussions. He believes that
"when it's finished. ...people will barelybe ableto comprehend, but theywill
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
162IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
not be ableto deny." While Somerset tries to understand Doe, Mills taunts
him,callinghim a "freak" and "insane," wantingto know if he sits around
"reading Guns andA.mmo, masturbatingin his own faeces" while marvelingat
hisown insanity.Mills is oblivious to the fact that they share a similar ideology.
Throughout Seven, Somerset and Mills's characters are in conflict: they
share few similarities and agree only once. Ironically itis John Doe with whom
Millsis twinned, as both are motivated by misguided love.Set in conjunction,
the names David Millsand John Doe allude to the biblical characters of David
and Jonathanfrom the books of Samuel. The story of Jonathan and David is
"a beautiful taleof comradeship" (Snowden 170) where "the soulof Jonathan
was knit with the soul of David" (I Samuel 18: 1). This is notedas "passing the
love of women" (II Samuel 1:26),and is taken by some authors to indicate a
homosexualrelationship,butinSex in theBibletheReverend Tom Horner
pointsout that while both men were married Davidand Jonathanwere
"essentially bisexual men" (Horner qtd. in Akerley 39).
Ironicallythe biblical David was chosen by God as a successor to Saul,
andGod's dynastic promiseto David (II Samuel 7)is the climax of David's
riseto power.Inthe promise God assures him of an eternaldynasty that, in
later generations, leads to the belief that a future son of David will restore the
fortunes of Israel and "usher in the finalreign ofGod" (Encyclopedia of Religion,
Vol.4,243). David embodied the hope offuture generations, as the father of
Solomon, ancestor of Mary,and therefore Jesus.If Mills is identified as being
of the House of Daviditis upon his offspring that the futurerests,but in Seven
his offspring has been murdered with his wife.
Mills and Doe share thesame reactionary and retributionist view of
society. The concept of "sin" as a moral transgression is dependent onits polar
oppositionto the ideal model of human behavior which endorses"purity",
"justice", "sanctity", and the "sacred" {New Catholic Encyclopedia, Vol.13, 235).
While Somerset accepts that crime is arealityof urban life, Mills is naive
enough to believe that he cando something about the level ofcrime in society,
even ifnot always bylegal means.Once "Jonathan Doe" is identified as a
suspectMills and Somerset visithis apartment, surprising him,and after a
gunfight he escapes. Thenow injured and angry Mills, against the argument of
Somerset, breaks police procedure and kicks down the door of the apartment,
an act which the audience will seeas justified because they know Doe is the
killer. To coveruphis transgressionMills bribes aprostituteto make an
obviously false statement. Again the audience will see thisas justified because
there is conclusive physical evidence inthe apartmentto link Doe to the
murders. However, his willingnessto break the law in his pursuit of "justice"
pushes himtoward outright criminality.
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 163
Doe believes heis workingfora "higher power," andis required to do
whatever is necessary to complete his "work." John Doe is not a "serial" killer
accordingto the FBI definition for a number of reasons.Firstlyhe is not
especially mobile, his victims are notchosen randomly, and he does not take a
"cooling off period (3 days) between murders, three of the central features of
thegenericFBIprofile.Doe'scrimes arenotsexually motivated, as the FBI
study claimed a "serial" killer's would be; rather, his motivation ismoral,and
he is convinced that all of his victims areguiltyofsins,sotheyare not
innocent either. Doe isa morally reactionary conservative who is punishing
societyfor its flaws-reminiscent of "Jack the Ripper," who was "down on
whores" (manyother alleged "serial" killers endorsed similarideas). Rather
than being a "serial" killer he isa "multiplemurderer" withno personal history
so he cannotbe analyzedin termsof vagueandabstract sociologicaltraits.
However, because ofthe symbolic nature of his crimes itis clear that he is not
acareer criminal, and oncehe completesthe series of seven murders he will
have to stop, because he believes he mustgivehis own life for the sin of
"Envy."
Doe doesnot empathizewith his victims and claimstheywere not
innocent. Similarly, throughouttheinvestigationMills isnoticeably
unsympathetictothe victims, such as when he describes the "Gluttony" victim
as a "fat fuck."Doe's temperrises for the firsttime when heis challenged
about the victims, andhe says, "only in a worldthis shitty could you eventry
to say these were innocent people and keep a straight face." His overdeveloped
literal morality expects perfection and heis disappointedto see"a deadlysin
on every street corner [and] in everyhome,and we tolerate it." His words
echo thereligious aspects of Reagan's political ideology. As an extreme
conservative moralist, Doe advocates theultimate retribution, believing that his
example willbe "puzzled over, and studied, and followed forever." However,
like his namesake inthe Caprafilm, he is a false savior. Miracle Woman (Frank
Capra,1931) featured Barbara Stanwyckas Sister Fallón, a fraudulent savior
who has to confess her sins to the followers she has deceived, and Long John
Willoughby (Gary Cooper)faces the same moral dilemma in MeetJohn Doe
(1941). Motifs offraud, despair, self-redemption and public confession were
recurring themes in Capra's laterwork (McBride 229).
John Doe preaches intolerance of moral sin with no more pityfor those
who are being punishedthanhehasforthosewhodiedat Sodom and
Gommorah. Inpunishingthe sinners heignoresthe relevant theology.
Accordingto Chaucer's "Parson's Tale",which is a sermon on the Seven
Deadly Sins, the remedy for "Anger" is patience; for "Envy", love;for "Sloth"
(accidie), fortitude; for"Greed" (avarice), mercy;for"Lust" (lechery), chastity
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
164IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
and continence; for "Gluttony", abstinence, temperance and sobriety; and for
"Pride", humilityortrue self-knowledge. These virtues are generallyin short
supply, and are absent from the characters of Mills and Doe.
Intheir punitive philosophy and idealization of traditional society,
values,and aspirations, Doe and Mills bear an uncomfortable resemblance to
each other. Bothare preaching thesame philosophy, and both are on a mission
tosave society from moral decay and corruption. The biblical passage which
recounts that "Jonathan strippedhimself of the robe that was upon him and
gave itto David,andhis garments, even tohis sword,and tohis bow,and to
his girdle"(I Samuel 18:4)is re-enacted in Seven when John Doe symbolically
hands over the role of avengerto his executioner, Mills. Blinded by his anger
andhis naivety, Mills inadvertently aids the killer and falls foul of Milton's
warning: "[...] who overcomes / Byforce,hath overcome but half his foe"
{Paradise Lost, Book1,1. 648-9).
The closing line of dialogue in the film belongs to Somerset, who quotes
fromErnest Hemingway: "The world is afine place,and worth fightingfor"
(For Whom The Bell Tolls 438).Hecan only agreewith thesecond sentiment,
because his experience hastaughthim thatthe post-industrial metropolisis
anythingbut "fine."Accordingto one criticof Dante,"Hell is a tour
conducted by Virgil; Purgatory isa purification from which Dante[the Pilgrim]
emerges changed and able to understand what he had not understood before"
(Holmes 74). But Mills,the modern Dante,does not learn or understand until
it istoo late,and with the source ofhis salvation, Tracy,dead hehas no hope
of reaching Earthly Paradise. Instead, prisonis the only future to which he can
lookforward. Theideaofthefailedstudent-teacherrelationshipismore
obvious inthescreenplayforSeventhaninthefilm,where Millssends
Somerset anoteafterhekillsDoe,acknowledgingthat Somerset wasright
about all of hisinsights and observations- the ones which Millssimply
dismissed because they did not fitinto his ideology,ratherthan questioning the
ideology itself.
Perhaps the only lesson Mills has learned is that because of his blinkered
and self-righteous ideology he has thesociety hedeserves, not the one he
demanded. Reagan promised a"new morning"inAmerica whenelected as
president butwhen Sevenconcludes thereisno happy ending; instead, the
social decay and cycle of violence are perpetuated. The humanist insights and
observations of Somerset are ignoreduntil it is toolate,and the downbeat
conclusionsuggests a bleak future for post-industrial society if the symbolic
politics championed byReagan's administration arenot replaced by practical
solutions to systematic problems.
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Morality, Theology And Politics In Seven 165
WORKS CITED
Akerley, Ben Edward The X-Rated Bible. Venice,CA:Feral House, 1998.
Berman, William C. America'sRightTurn,From Nixon toBush. Baltimore:Johns Hopkins UP,
1994.
Boyarsky,Bill. The Rise of Ronald Reagan.NewYork: Random, 1968.
Dallek, Robert. Ronald Reagan: The Politics of Symbolism. Cambridge: Harvard UP,1984.
DanteAlighieri.TheDivineComedyVol. 1:Inferno. Trans Mark Musa. Harmondsworth:
Penguin,1984.
Dante Alighieri, l^aVita Nuova,Trans. Barbara Reynolds. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1986.
DanteAlighieri.TheDivine Comedy:2Purgatorio. Trans.JohnD. Sinclair. Oxford: Oxford
UP,1971.
Dante Alighieri. The Purgatorio. Trans. John, Ciardi.New York: Mentor, 1961.
Daston, Lorraine, and Katherine Park, Wonders and theOrderof Nature, 1150-1750. New
York:Zone,1998.
Dyer, Richard. Seven. London: BFI,1999.
The Encyclopedia of Religion. 1987.
"TheFederal Role InInvestigation of Serial Violent Crime: Hearings Before A
Subcommittee On Government Operations." House ofRepresentatives,99
Congress,2Session, 9Apriland 21May1986,Washington: United States
Government Printing Office, 1986.
Goldman, Jane,The X-Files Bookof the Unexplained: Vol 2. London: Simonand Schuster,
1996.
Hemingway, Ernest. For Whom The Bell Tolls.London: Jonathan Cape,1975.
Hicks,Robert D. In Pursuit of Satan: Police and theOccult. New York: Prometheus, 1991.
Holmes, George.Dante. Oxford: Oxford UP,1980.
Johnson, Haynes. Sleepwalking Through History: America inthe ReaganYears. New York:
Anchor, 1992.
Kessler, Ronald. The FBI. London: Corgi,1994.
"Killer Movie." Film Review (Feb. 1996): 33-42.
Krupey, Gregory. "The ChristianRight, Zionism, andthe Comingof the Pentaholocaust."
In Apocalypse Culture. 2nded. Ed.Adam Parfrey. Los Angeles:Feral House, 1990: 287-
298.
Leyton, Elliot. Hunting Humans: Inside theMinds of Mass Murders. London: Penguin,1989.
"Library Files Checked InZodiac Investigation." New York Times 18 July 1990: B4.
McBride, Joseph. Frank Capra: The Catastrophe of Success. London: Faber,1992.
Milligen, Stephen.Better ToReignIn Hell:Serial Killers,Media Panics and theFBI. London:
Headpress-Critical Visions, 2006.
Milton, John. The Complete EnglishPoems.Rev.ed.London: Everyman, 1990.
NewCatholic Encyclopedia. 1967.
"Remarks at the Annual Conference of the National Sheriffs Association in Hartford
Connecticut.June20,1984." The PublicPapers of thePresidents: Ronald Reagan, 1984,
Washington: United States Government Printing Office,1985: 839-44.
Salisbury,Mark. "Butcher My Scriptand I'm Outta Here." The Guardian, Screen9 April1999:
12.
Salisbury, Mark. Rev. oíSeven. Empire (Feb. 1996):28-29.
Salisbury,Mark. "Seventh Hell."Empire (Feb. 1996): 78-83, 85-87.
Sante,Luc. Ijow Ufe: Ijires and Snares of Old New York. London: Granta, 1998.
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
166IRISH JOURNAL OF AMERICAN STUDIES, VOLUMES 13 and 14, 2004-05
"Serial KillersAnd Child Abductions: HearingBefore The Subcommittee On Juvenile
JusticeOf The Committee OnThe Judiciary." Houseof Representatives,104th
Congress,1st session, 14 September 1995.
"Serial Murders:Hearing before the Subcommittee on Juvenile Justice of the Committee on
theJudiciary, United StatesSenate, Ninety Eighth Congress,FirstSession, on
Patterns of Murders Committed by One Person, inLargeNumbers withNo
Apparent Rhyme, Reason or Motivation." 12 July 1983,Washington: United States
Government Printing Office, 1983.
Snowden, Keithley. Myth and I¿vend in thebible. London: Watts,1915.
Steigerwald, David. The Sixties and theEnd of Modern America. New York:St. Martin's, 1995.
"Stiff Competition." Empire (Feb. 1996):87.
"Taking Chances."Sight and Sound (Feb.1998):61.
Täubin, Amy,"The Allureof Decay," Sight andSound (January 1996):22-24.
Walker, Andrew Kevin. Seven. Final Draft ofScript8Aug. 1994.
<http://www.davidfincher.net/info/scripts/seven_final_files/sevenscript.html>.
Westbrook, Caroline. "Killer Instinct." Empire (Feb. 1996): 86.
Williams, David E. "The Sins of a Serial Killer." American Cinematographer (Oct. 1995):34-42.
Wrathall, John. "Seven."Sight and Sound(Jan. 1996):50.
This content downloaded from
73.15.54.68 on Thu, 16 Jul 2026 21:37:25 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
