Seven Remastered: David Fincher on What He Fixed in Movie
https://www.indiewire.com/features/interviews/seven-remastered-david-fincher-interview-1234974911/

Seven Remastered: David Fincher on What He Fixed in Movie
Read Next:
Cannes 2026 Movies Sold: ‘Atonement’ with Boyd Holbrook, Kenneth Branagh, and Hiam Abbass Lands at Kino Lorber
Newsletters
Search Icon
Close
Open Menu
Close
Search Icon
Open Search
Close Menu
Follow Us
Facebook
Instagram
Pinterest
YouTube
Alerts & Newsletters
By providing your information, you agree to our
Terms of Use
and our
We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google
and
Terms of Service
apply.
PMC Logo
SEVEN IN 4K
For ‘Seven’ Restoration, David Fincher Went Back and ‘Kissed in Some of the City’
On the eve of its Chinese IMAX premiere, Fincher told IndieWire about excavating and remastering his breakout 1995 serial killer neo-noir.
Bill Desowitz
Plus icon
Bill Desowitz
BillDesowitz
More stories by Bill
Robot Choir Dolls Helped ‘Elio’ Find the Music of Outer Space
Read more
Leaning Into Loneliness Saved ‘Elio’
Read more
‘KPop Demon Hunters’ Finds Music That Slays (Monsters)
Read more
April 19, 2024 9:30 am
'Seven'
Warner Bros.
Share
Share on Facebook
Post
google
Google Preferred
Share on LinkedIn
Show more sharing options
Share to Flipboard
Submit to Reddit
Pin it
Post to Tumblr
Email
Print This Page
Share on WhatsApp
David Fincher
is a philosopher as well as a perfectionist. When asked about the significance of his 8K remastering of
“Seven”
(premiering April 19 at the Chinese IMAX in 4K as part of the
TCM Classic Film Festival)
, he told IndieWire, “If you think of it in string theory, it’s like a volumetric capture of where all these careers were at, and what these people wanted and needed and infused the thing with.”
Fincher was referring, of course, to Morgan Freeman, Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow, Kevin Spacey, and the rest of the cast and crew who made his
breakout 1995 serial killer neo-noir
. The
film
was a brilliant analog product of the era (with only
seven
weeks of prep) but also ahead of its time in conveying a dark, creepy, nihilistic police procedural that got under our skin like no other film (select release prints even underwent a bleach bypass, silver retention process that provided greater color density and black levels).
Related Stories
Ava DuVernay Returns to Documentaries (and to Netflix) with ’14th’ Amid Trump’s Challenge to Birthright Citizenship
The Casting Director Behind Horror’s Biggest Hits Reveals How the Genre’s Breakout Stars Get Discovered
“It is what it is, warts and all,” Fincher said. “And some of it is spectacular and some of it is stuff that I would change or fix today, but I didn’t want to mess with that. There’s a lot of imperfections, there’s a lot of things that you just don’t see on film. When people say they love the look of film, what they’re talking about is chaos, entropy, and softness. Now, of course, we live in an HDR world where you get those kinds of very deep, rich, velvety blacks for free.
“And we had to negotiate that fine line between what to fix or not,” Fincher continued. “So we attempted to go back in and fix to make it match. And kind of repaint stuff and just take out water spots and little edge flashes. And some of it is impossible to get it to match, certainly by today’s standards. So there was a lot of excavation. I didn’t realize it would take as long as it did, at least six months dealing with files and making notes, and maybe the last nine months to a year putting some of it on the back burner while we finished ‘The Killer’ and did initial work on ‘Panic Room,’ which is what we’re working on now.”
‘Seven’
Warner Bros.
“Seven” was scanned by Warner Bros.’ Motion Picture Imaging from the original camera negative and mastered in 8K by Peter Mavromates, head of Fincher’s post team. All color corrections, retouches, and VFX were also rendered in 8K. However, because there is currently no distribution chain for 8K, it was downsampled to 4K. There will be an upcoming 4K Blu-ray release of “Seven” through Warner Bros.
“Seven” was filmed in downtown L.A., mostly in the rain, by
cinematographer Darius Khondji
. He shot in Super 35 with Panavision cameras and Primo spherical lenses in 2.39. He used a combination of Steadicam and hand-held shots, creating a modern yet scary aesthetic in consultation with Fincher. For interiors, he utilized toplighting and Chinese lanterns for a soft, gritty, moist look.
“Darius Khondji used to change film stocks in the middle of the scene, depending on how contrasty he wanted the coverage to be,” Fincher added. “And it all kind of mushed together in the world of Kodak and Deluxe. And he had a 35mm hand-held camera for a lot of the chase stuff, which was very effective…but it was a film scratcher and film shredder.” Now that’s been fixed to create more consistency.
Back in 1995, it was also completely acceptable to have a window that was de-maxed and became a soft light for the scene or to have background cityscapes with rushed matte paintings in windows. But Fincher claimed that unfinished work wouldn’t fly today, so they had to “go back in and kiss in some of the city.”
‘Seven’
Warner Bros.
“It’s pretty subtle but there’s now detail there,” Mavromates told IndieWire. “Now you can see it more clearly, and then there’s a lot of things that just bothered him that wasn’t quite to the level he wanted.”
In fact, the lack of visual control that Fincher displayed on “Seven” was responsible for his current reputation as a perfectionist. “One of the things that stands out in the way David makes his movies today is that he spends a lot of time working on and perfecting camera movement,” Mavromates explained. “And this is something that he could not do with ‘Seven’ back then. So what you see here sometimes is some of those little bumps in camera moves that are in the original movie are now gone.”
Then there was the annoying flyaway hair that suddenly appeared on Paltrow’s face during that intimate diner scene with Freeman. “You couldn’t even see in the film version that it cuts right through Gwyneth’s eye,” Fincher said. “And I don’t think I’ve ever seen it in 1080p. But in 4K you can definitely see it, and we had to take that thing out because it was too distracting.”
Mavromates worked with IMAX on the conversion of “Seven” to make it look good on their enormous screen. However, Fincher insisted on keeping the film’s original 2.39 aspect ratio rather than conforming to IMAX’s taller framing. The director and Mavromates also decided to skip IMAX’s grain management system since they had already run “Seven” through their own, and IMAX agreed that it was unnecessary.
Fincher was pleased with how it looks in IMAX, even though it’s not his preferred format: “This is going to be on that huge screen, which is another interesting thing,” he said. “These are closeups that I would probably today never frame so tight.”
Overall, though, the director admitted that he hasn’t revisited “Seven” in a very long time: “I mean, some stuff snuck up on me,” he said. “There were definitely moments that these were different creatures back then. I can’t imagine the movie without Morgan.”
Daily Headlines
Daily Headlines covering Film, TV and more.
Subscribe
More from IndieWire
Best Of
Christopher Nolan Movies, Ranked from ‘The Dark Knight’ and ‘Tenet’ to ‘Oppenheimer’ and ‘The Odyssey’
Filmmaker Toolkit
How ‘Star City’ Turned the Soviet Space Program Into TV’s Most Thrilling Puzzle Box
Features
Sydney Pollack Was One of the Great Directors of His Generation — A New Book Breaks Down His Approach
Wet Hot Comedy Writing
Don’t Let the Silly Skits Fool You, ‘Gail Daughtry’ Is a Seriously Well-Written Screenplay
Interview... With the Vampire
‘The Vampire Lestat’ Stars Break Down a Cathartic, Climactic Episode 6 — and What’s Next for Lestat and Louis
Justice for Ken Leung
‘Industry’ Emmy Snub: Prestige TV Is a Moniker Series Are Born with but Rarely Earn — Opinion
Daily Headlines
Daily Headlines covering Film, TV and more.
By providing your information, you agree to our
Terms of Use
and our
We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google
and
Terms of Service
apply.
Must Read
Features
The 25 Best Movies of 2025
Features
The 10 Best TV Series of 2025
Best of 2025
The 24 Best Film and TV Performances of 2025
More From IndieWire
Film Review
‘The Odyssey’ Review: Christopher Nolan Defies the Gods with a Staggering Epic About Fate, Family, and the Future of Living in a Broken World
Exclusive
Dead Meat YouTube Channel Launches ‘Fresh Meat’ Anthology Competition for Horror Filmmakers
PMC Logo
Most Popular
Randolph Mantooth, Firefighter-Paramedic Johnny Gage on ‘Emergency!,’ Dies at 80
‘Moana’ Cast Guide: Every Live-Action Character vs. the Original Animation
What King Charles 'Made Very Clear' To Prince Harry Before Reunion With Meghan Markle & Kids
Vinod Khosla to Buy Seattle Seahawks for $9.6 Billion
You may also like
Netflix Q2 Earnings Results In-Line With Expectations, Stock Drops on Lower Q3 Outlook
rollingstone
Ava Max Takes Back Her Power on New Single ‘Lovin Myself’
ABC & NBC To Air Donald Trump’s Primetime Speech On Streaming News Channels Only Amid Reports He’ll Bring Up Stolen Election Claims
Flores v. NFL Discrimination Case to Remain in Court, Judge Says
PMC Logo
Our Sites
