Shawshank_Academic_Article
In repo

Citation: Boyce, Benjamin. 2023.
Lessons from Shawshank: Outlaws,
Lawmen and the Spectacle of
Punishment. Humanities 12: 10.
https://doi.org/10.3390/h12010010
Received: 14 September 2022
Revised: 3 December 2022
Accepted: 29 December 2022
Published: 12 January 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
humanities
Article
Lessons from Shawshank: Outlaws, Lawmen and the Spectacle
of Punishment
Benjamin Boyce
Communication Department, University of Colorado Denver, Denver, CO 80204, USA;
benjamin.boyce@ucdenver.edu
Abstract: For more than a century, cinema has offered a rich source of images and narratives about
crime and punishment. Unfortunately, the restricted nature of correctional environments and the
social stigma surrounding incarceration leave most viewers reliant on media representations for
the majority of their knowledge about correctional spaces. In most media representations of crime
and punishment, outlaws and lawmen are reduced to stereotypical archetypes, and incarcerated
characters are some of the evilest villains one will ever encounter. Moreover, the prison environment
is painted as a playground for bad behavior, as penance for redeemable outlaws, or as an outright
paradox that claims to reduce criminality despite appearing to increase it. Our uncritical acceptance
of such characterizations goes hand in hand with our cultural addiction to mass incarceration.
Limitless stories about uncontainable monsters perpetrating awful crimes inside cushy taxpayer
funded facilities endorse a worldview where a permanently expanding and harshening prison system
is vital to the safety of a functioning society. In short, our reliance on the spectacle of punishment has
left us woefully and willfully misinformed about prison and those who wind up there.
Keywords: Shawshank; Litchﬁeld; Oz;Les Mis érables ; incarceration; spectacle; television; stereotypes;
archetypes; prison cinema
1. Introduction
In the fall of 2004, I (the author) was shackled to a group of a dozen other men, loaded
onto a transport van, and shipped to what was the largest walled prison on earth when
it began housing incarcerated people in 1937 (Bright 1996). That long trip to Jackson,
Michigan, on the opposite side of the state from where I grew up, was the ﬁnal chapter
in my preparation for prison—my dress rehearsal for the penitentiary. I knew what was
coming. I had seen sexual assaults and requisite violence depicted in Blood In Blood Out
(Hackford 1993). The sound of the entire cellblock in The Shawshank Redemption chanting
“Fresh ﬁsh!” until one man breaks down crying for his mother rang in my ears (Darabont
1994). The murder of a suspect just before he is released in Short Eyes replayed in my mind’s
eye (Young 1977). I believed I was about to enter a world of corrupt ofﬁcials, heartless
administrators, and cruel monsters all intent on victimizing me. Those were the only images
of prison I had ever seen, so I had prepared for those images. I did hundreds of pushups
every day to bulk up my skinny frame. My weekly order of snacks grew as I tried to pack
on the pounds. The soft expressions and light tone I normally used to communicate with
those around me were repressed in favor of a hard glare and a deep voice. I transformed
myself into what I knew prison would require me to be. Then I got there and realized
everything I thought I knew about prison was wrong, or at least misunderstood. The
spectacle of punishment, from television and ﬁlms to commercials and social media, had
convinced me to prepare for a specter that never appeared. But how did that happen?
In the following pages, I track the evolution of cinematic spectacles of punishment,
focusing on what Michelle Brown has called, “a shadow world of moral judgement and
penal logics [that] exists beyond prison walls as a constant and perpetually growing cultural
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10. https://doi.org/10.3390/h12010010 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/humanities
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 2 of 15
resource for people to make sense of punishment” (Brown 2009, p. 5). In the United States,
those who have never been to prison are afraid of those who have, a fear learned and
reinforced through the stories we consume (Yousman 2013). I end with a call for cultural
and cinematic reorientation. The recipe for cinematic prisons has long required certain
key ingredients which titillate audiences while leaving us creeped out about the bad guys
we see inside. Until the representation is updated, those who have never been to prison
will continue to look at those who have as dangerous outsiders with warped morals. Until
we change the way we think about those in prison, we will continue to demand the same
problematic spectacles as always. Our cultural attitudes regarding crime and punishment
must change alongside our expectations for media productions.
2. As Seen on TV
Cinema has been teaching viewers about the world for more than a century, and
cultural critics have been there from the start, pointing out the dangers of our addiction
to the spectacle. Walter Benjamin diagnosed our unhealthy affection for the “phony spell
of commodity” in 1935, before most homes contained a television (Benjamin 1935, p. 231).
By 1947, Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer were criticizing our cultural habits of
“aesthetic mass consumption,” noting the ways that media spectacles designed to appeal
to a mass audience often teach us things about the world that are not necessarily true
(Adorno and Horkheimer 1947, p. 139). At the time, the world was still coming to
terms with the atrocities of the Holocaust, and cultural critics were there to pinpoint the
relationship between mediated messages and human motivation. In 1963, after attending
Adolf Eichmann’s trial for crimes against humanity and the Jewish people, Hannah Arendt
described Nazi war criminals as having been inﬂuenced by mediated messages that caused
them to act in ways that were entirely predictable. All of us, Arendt claimed, are capable of
doing the same thing if we are exposed to the same sorts of mediated messages.
As black and white TVs turned to HD ﬂatscreens, and the rabbit ears antenna was
swapped out for cable, cultural critics kept pace. In 1984, Michel de Certeau unpacked
the ways media teach us things about the world even when we know we are consuming
ﬁction: “the spectator-observer knows that they are merely ‘semblances,’ the results of
manipulations . . .but all the same , he assumes that these simulations have the status of the
real” (p. 188). By 1994, theory had moved to example as bell hooks described how media
depictions of poverty teach viewers, wrongly, that the poor are immoral and driven by
greed, and that wealth typically comes from hard work (p. 197). Naturally, those who
watch a lot of television and ﬁlms come to believe that wealth springs from ethics, and that
most poverty is the result of laziness or immorality. Our beliefs inform our behavior.
The twenty-ﬁrst century brought new statistics to strengthen well-established theory.
Travis Dixon found that television news programs constantly overrepresent the number of
crimes committed by non-white people and the number of arrests made by white ofﬁcers,
causing viewers to unwittingly accept the false narrative that crime is much more common
than it actually is, and that it is usually committed by nonwhite suspects (Dixon 2017).
Bill Yousman veriﬁed that watching prison-based television shows full of mayhem and
murder unwittingly causes us to become more supportive of punishment-oriented policies,
up to and including the death penalty (Yousman 2013). Kathleen Donovan and Charles
Klahm IV described why those who watch television crime dramas are more likely to
believe the police are generally successful at reducing crime, that they only use force
when necessary, and that misconduct or abuse at the hands of police seldom leads to
false confessions (Donovan and Klahm 2015). Allison Page and Laurie Ouellette reported
that even when cinematic prisons feature dialogue and plot designed to challenge the
norm of mass incarceration, we often still come to endorse an expanding and harshening
correctional system based on the behavior of those we see inside (Page and Ouellette 2019).
None of these effects take place consciously within the viewer’s mind. If you ask
television or movie audiences how much their opinions have changed based on their media
diet, they usually claim to be uninﬂuenced by the stories they consume and immune to the
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 3 of 15
messages that affect the rest of us (Yousman 2013; Dixon 2017). We frequently fail to notice
the bulk of what we learn from media.
Meanwhile, Hollywood continues to sell us constantly repackaged facsimiles, a sit-
uation that becomes obvious when one examines the wares on offer from the spectacle.
Nine Spiderman ﬁlms have been produced and sold to the public since 2002 (Miller et al.
2021). Television is full of “new” productions based on shows that were canceled decades
ago: The Wonder Years, Saved by the Bell, CSI: Las Vegas, Quantum Leap ,True Blood, Frasier, A
League of their Own, Charmed, Will & Grace , (Fresh Prince of )Bel-Air , and Gossip Girls , along
with plenty of others. Reboots have become an increasingly popular solution to consumer
demand for content that appears new while still scratching familiar itches. We want the
freshness of novelty alongside the comfort of the common. The never-ending growth of
new streaming services has only increased the rate of production, and social media has
both expanded alongside the spectacle and worked to strengthen its attraction.
Media productions reﬂect our cultural norms, but they are also a reﬂection ofcultural
norms. They show us the truth about ourselves and how we think, but they also shape our
truths and our thoughts. As bell hooks explains:
Much of the magic of cinema lies in the medium’s power to give us something
other than life as is . . .Movies do not merely offer us the opportunity to reimagine
the culture we most intimately know on the screen, they create culture. (Hooks
1996, p. 12)
Of course, sometimes producers get it wrong. As cinematic spectacles venture from
the mundane into the bizarre, viewers are often confronted with information that cannot
be challenged with real life experience. When faulty information is the only information
available, we come to accept ﬁction as fact. The stories in our movies and TV shows
become the stories in our imaginations, and we often lack the experience necessary to
counterbalance the spectacle. As Michelle Brown has suggested, “much of the popular
knowledge about punishment is constructed—in spaces far from the social realities and the
social facts that deﬁne mass incarceration” (Brown 2009, p. 4).
Seven-Block was a symphony of echoes when I got back from chow that ﬁrst night.
The cellblock is one of many spread across the 52-acre facility located on the outskirts of
Jackson. I climbed the steel staircase to level 3, then started counting as I walked past cells;
1, 2, 3 . . .mine was the 15th cell on the tier, halfway down the walkway. The unit was
ﬁve stories tall with 150 cells on each side, and it sounded like all 300 of us were always
talking all the time. At cell 7, I stopped and asked an old-timer if he had anything for me
to read. He smiled and handed the ﬁrst half of an Encyclopedia Brown novel through the
bars. Every book at Jackson was ripped in half so two people could read it at the same time.
There still weren’t nearly enough books to go around. Writing from Death Row, Mumia
Abu-Jamal once said, “Life here oscillates between the banal and the bizarre” (Abu-Jamal
1995, p. 6). The banal is the norm. Warehoused humans with wasted potential are packed
from corner to corner. The spectacle of punishment seldom captures the boredom that
predominates the US correctional environment. Two hours later, I ﬁnished the half-book
and started reading it over again.
2.1. Introducing the Cast: Les Mis érables
The latest English (language) movie reboot of Victor Hugo’s (1862) outlaw story Les
Mis érables hit theatres in 2012, becoming an immediate success (Hooper 2012). The block-
buster made $283 million during its ﬁrst month in theaters, winning three Golden Globes
and three Academy Awards in the process (Wioszczyna 2013). Many were unsurprised
with the ﬁlm’s popularity. Since 1985, the musical upon which the ﬁlm is based has been
translated into at least 21 languages, performed in no less than 43 countries, and won
upwards of 100 awards while being seen by more than 60 million people (Dargis 2012). As
early as 1909, movie producers were taking advantage of the story’s notoriety (Blackton
1909). And to this day, there is something about this narrative that continues to resonate
with audiences across the world.
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 4 of 15
The success of any cinematic production depends, in part, on the producers’ use of
archetypes—recurring characters in literature, ﬁlm or television who are identiﬁable by
commonly held traits. Much like the latest Hollywood reboot, each new production appears
original at ﬁrst glance, but closer inspection reveals repackaged hand me downs disguised
as unique creations. As Carl Jung explained, “The archetype is a tendency to form such
representations as a motif—representations that can vary a great deal in detail without
losing their basic pattern” (Jaff é1964, p. 58). Archetypes do more than just help us make
sense of the stories we consume; they help us make sense of the world.
Cinematic archetypes make us feel comfortable. When they appear, we know what to
expect, so once they set up shop in a culture’s media representations, they stick around for
a long time. As Aniela Jaffe suggests, “The intertwined history of religion and art, reaching
back to prehistoric times, is the record that our ancestors have left of the symbols that were
meaningful and moving to them” (Jung 1964, p. 257). Contemporary archetypes are the
shadows and echoes of stories which were valued and shared by those who came before us.
That means we can use archetypes to identify genealogical patterns in media which reveal
underlying trends in cultural norms; we can decode them to better understand ourselves
and our place in the world. In Les Mis érables , we meet two archetypal characters whose
shadows continue to reappear in ﬁlm and literature to this day: the outlaw who is seeking
redemption, and the lawman who refuses to extend it. As they materialize in different
settings and plots, the outlaw and the lawman operate within an archetypal prison space
that both reveals and shapes cultural understanding of prison and those inside it.
2.2. The Archetypal Outlaw
The protagonist in Les Mis érables is Jean Valjean, an outlaw who is granted parole near
the story’s beginning.1He was originally arrested for stealing a loaf of bread to feed his
family, but despite his best efforts to move beyond his conviction, the rest of the world
appears unwilling to give him a second chance. Marked as a criminal, he struggles to ﬁnd
employment, food and housing. As viewers, we empathize, that is, until a stranger offers
him shelter and he responds by making off with the man’s silver in the middle of the night.
Those who had turned Valjean away based on his record seem, for a moment, to have been
correct in their assumptions about his character, as he proves himself to be a stereotypical
recidivist. As the story picks up steam, we are invited to wonder whether this outlaw is
capable of redemption at all.
Valjean is arrested and dragged back to the scene of the crime, but in a twist, the
homeowner claims the items were a gift. The stranger’s kindness is a turning point in the
story, causing Valjean the incorrigible criminal to begin the transformation into Valjean
the redeemed outlaw. As viewers, we become engrossed in a plot driven by emotions we
seldom experience so richly in our own lives: relief, fear, anticipation, terror, and most
importantly, redemption. Throughout the following years, Valjean makes us proud: he
rescues a young girl from her abusers, he becomes Mayor of a local town, and he even saves
the life of a stranger who becomes pinned beneath a cart. Redemption becomes his sole
mission in life, and by the story’s conclusion, Valjean is hard to hate, while the lawman who
relentlessly chases him has taken on many of the traits we originally disliked in Valjean.
Les Mis érables stands as what Mike Nellis has called “the foundational redemptive
text” (Nellis 2009, p. 131). According to Nellis, Valjean’s redemption is established through
speciﬁc events: he “experiences guilt and takes responsibility for his future, makes amends
by becoming a productive citizen and prevents suffering in another generation,” all while
enduring “whatever moral duty requires of him” (Nellis 2009, p. 132). This basic archetypal
character of the outlaw seeking redemption has remained a prominent ﬁgure in prison
cinema for more than a century. The level of success which the outlaw experiences in their
attempts at reformation varies from story to story, and sometimes the archetypal outlaw
discards the idea of redemption altogether. However, the desire for redemption always
materializes at some point in the narrative of the redeemed outlaw.
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 5 of 15
2.3. The Archetypal Lawman
Les Mis érables also introduced Police Inspector Javert, an archetypal lawman who
represents the counterpart of the outlaw seeking redemption. Javert chases the reformed
Valjean wherever he ﬂees regardless of the years that pass or the change of heart the outlaw
appears to exhibit. As Nellis explains:
Javert, embodies all that is hostile to the principle of giving offenders second
chances . . .he represents both the long shadow of imprisonment, and the impos-
sibility of ever becoming free of its inﬂuence or stigma, and the diffusion of penal
authority into every crevice of public life. (Nellis 2009, p. 132)
True to character, Javert cannot reconcile the outlaw’s redemption with his belief
that outlaws are irredeemable, so when Valjean risks his freedom and safety to save the
inspector, Javert responds by taking his own life. The archetypal lawman lacks the capacity
to comprehend a redeemed outlaw. When faced with the reality of a world where outlaws
are capable of redemption, the lawman in Les Mis érables simply cannot go on living.
2.4. Repackaged and Resold
The two archetypes detailed above—the outlaw seeking redemption and the lawman
who refuses to offer it—continue to make regular appearances in contemporary media.
They are not hard to spot, despite the best efforts of producers to disguise them as new and
original in each production. And they go all the way back to the original moving pictures,
carving a trail through the genealogy of cinema that reﬂects cultural norms and attitudes
along the way.
In the early years of cinema, outlaw stories were generally simple narratives of re-
demption without much spectacle. In 1920, Buster Keaton played an archetypal outlaw in
the silent ﬁlm Convict 13 , where his character is arrested and imprisoned, but eventually
released after he proves his innocence (Cline and Keaton 1920). Films in which the outlaw’s
innocence is eventually established after a period of doubt make it easy for audiences to
offer redemption, and as such, they have always been a popular choice for producers. In
1932, Richard Walters was a redeemed outlaw in The Last Mile , sent to death row for a
crime he did not commit and surrounded by archetypal lawman and other incarcerated
characters who all refuse to accept his claims of innocence until he is eventually pardoned
(Bischoff 1932). A few years later, in 1934, Hollywood turned out an early reboot with The
Count of Monte Cristo , which pitted redeemed outlaw Edmond Dant ès against a warden, a
prosecutor, and a prison structure that all seem dead set on keeping him locked up and
miserable for the rest of his life (Lee 1934). The 1939 ﬁlm Convict’s Code followed outlaw
Dave Tyler to prison for a crime he did not commit; once there, the warden and his parole
ofﬁcer encourage him to stop professing his innocence all the way up to the day he is
eventually acquitted (Hillyer 1939). In 1940 it was mobster Tommy Gordan in Sing Sing
prison in Castle on the Hudson , a ﬁlm that never awards the outlaw his redemption despite
his innocence; he is eventually put to death (Litvak 1840).
By the 1950s, Hollywood was catching its stride and beginning to reﬂect evolving
cultural attitudes regarding civil rights, social justice, and incarceration. The 1957 ﬁlm Jail-
house Rock follows redeemed outlaw Vince Everett, played by Elvis Presley, into prison and
through his efforts to become a musician after his release, an accomplishment which gains
him what Mike Nellis calls “redemption through art” (Thorpe 1957; Nellis 2009, p. 140).
As the 1960s Civil Rights Movement picked up steam, the possibility of redemption being
an option for even the most culturally feared members of society became central to many
spectacles of punishment. The Bird Man of Alcatraz hit theatres in 1962, loosely based on the
life of redeemed outlaw Robert Stroud, who is sent to prison for murder but eventually
ﬁnds redemption through personal growth and humanizing acts of assistance, including
rescuing and raising birds and getting others in prison to do the same. (Frankenheimer
1962). In 1967, Cool Hand Luke introduced movie-goers to veteran Luke Jackson, who is
sentenced to prison for drunkenly stealing parking meters and eventually killed by the
obstinate lawman when he tries to escape (Rosenberg). Viewers were also treated to Robert
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 6 of 15
Aldrich’s The Dirty Dozen in 1967, a story about a group of twelve redeemed outlaws, each
sentenced either to life in prison, or to death, and each offered a deal whereby they can earn
their freedom (and their redemption) if they accept a dangerous mission to kill a group
of Nazis (Aldrich). The outlaws and lawmen in these productions reﬂected an optimistic
cultural belief that those in prison were capable of redemption, but only if the system was
set up to foster it. Despite the apparent updates, just like earlier cinematic representations
of crime and punishment, these ﬁlms continued to utilize the tried-and-true archetypal
outlaw and lawman operating within an archetypal prison.
By the 1970s, cultural support for updating the criminal justice system to focus on
rehabilitation was largely replaced by a cynical attitude that change was not possible, and
that prison was an awful-but-necessary place that usually made people more violent and
immoral than before they were arrested. Robert Martinson’s now infamous (Martinson
1974) metanalysis was instrumental in the implementation of what would come to be
known as the doctrine of “Nothing Works,” which stripped recovery, rehabilitation and
educational programs out of prisons and classiﬁed all such projects as wasteful. Movie
producers reﬂected the cultural change in ﬁlms that painted the prison system as a trap
requiring extraordinary efforts to navigate. In 1974, The Longest Yard won a Golden Globe
Award for best picture in the category of musical or comedy by telling the story of redeemed
outlaw Paul Crewe, a professional quarterback who is sent to prison for drunk driving and
theft, and who earns his redemption by refusing to intentionally lose a football game against
the prison guards even when he is threatened with trumped up charges and additional
punishment (Aldrich 1974). In 1979, Escape From Alcatraz followed outlaw Frank Morris
into Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary, where he is accosted by both archetypal lawmen and
other incarcerated characters, eventually forcing him to escape (Siegel 1979). In 1981, it
was John Carpenter’s (1981) Escape from New York with outlaw Snake Plissken, who earns
his redemption by saving the President from a dystopian death. These ﬁlms all reﬂected
the prevailing cultural attitude that prisons were destructive, if necessary, spaces where
likeable characters often wind up due to forces beyond their control, and where escape is
often the only means of avoiding violence. Despite these changes in tone, the archetypal
outlaws and lawmen remained, occupying their archetypal prisons.
The failure of prison to rehabilitate remained a popular theme throughout the 1990s
and into the 2000s. Perhaps the most infamous prison ﬁlm of all time, The Shawshank
Redemption , premiered in 1994, pitting outlaw Andy Dufresne against the prison’s obstinate
lawmen, including the warden and his gang of dirty guards (Darabont). Dead Man Walk-
ingpremiered in 1995, introducing archetypal outlaw Matthew Poncelet, who earns his
redemption by eventually confessing to a crime he has long denied, but only as a result of
his impending death, not from any form of rehabilitation or personal growth (Robbins). In
1996, Sling Blade put a spin on the idea of redemption when released outlaw Karl Childers
winds up back in jail for killing a local woman’s abusive boyfriend to protect her and her
son, effectively channeling his unresolved criminality toward an acceptable target while
revealing the prison’s ultimate failure to rehabilitate him during his ﬁrst stay (Thornton
1996). Decades later, producers would utilize the same trope of the outlaw channeling their
desire for murder toward acceptable targets to earn a sort of redemption with shows like
Showtime’s Dexter (Cerone et al. 2006) and HBO’s Barry (Berg et al. 2018).
In 2000, Oh Brother, Where Art Thou? rebooted Homer’s Greek classic The Odyssey into
a 1937 Mississippi setting with a story that follows three redeemed outlaws who escape a
chain gang and are nearly killed by the obstinate lawman even after he receives word that
they were pardoned (Coen 2000). In 2001, The Last Castle told the story of General Eugene
Irwin, who is court-martialed and sent to a maximum-security military prison run by an
obstinate lawman who eventually murders him (Lurie 2001). In 2002, Omar Epps starred in
Conviction , a ﬁlm based on the life of outlaw Carl Upchurch, who earns his redemption by
organizing a nationwide peace summit for US gangs even as the local police act as lawmen
who continue to harass and arrest him (Sullivan). In 2005, FOX’s television series Prison
Break hit prime time with redeemed outlaw Michael Scoﬁeld, a character who earns his
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 7 of 15
redemption by breaking his innocent brother out of a corrupt prison (Scheuring). In 2006 it
was Let’s go to Prison! , a slapstick comedy that pits redeemed outlaw Nelson Biederman IV
against a prison full of carefree archetypal lawmen and unrepentant villains who run the
place (Odenkirk 2006). In 2009, Jim Carey and Ewan McGregor played redeemed outlaws
in the comedy ﬁlm I Love you Phillip Morris , yet another representation of prison as a space
where abuse is common and unpunished, and where escape is the only real option for
redemption (Requa).
By the 2010s, race, class and gender were shaping cultural attitudes and academic
scholarship related to crime and punishment. Michelle Alexander’s (2010) The New Jim Crow
was released in 2010, ushering in an era of critical research aimed at understanding and
undoing the cultural stigma of incarceration while acknowledging the ways one’s identity
informs one’s experience of punishment. Jenji Kohan’s (Kohan 2013–2019) blockbuster
Orange is the New Black was released in 2013, introducing redeemed outlaw Piper and a
long list of obstinate lawmen who treat her and everyone else in the prison so poorly that a
riot breaks out in season four. Kohan explained the show’s success by pointing to Piper’s
whiteness in an interview with NPR’s Terry Gross:
In a lot of ways Piper was my Trojan Horse. You’re not going to go into a network
and sell a show on really fascinating tales of black women, and Latina women,
and old women and criminals. But if you take this white girl, this sort of ﬁsh out
of water, and you follow her in, you can then expand your world and tell all of
those other stories. (Gross 2013)
Throughout these various updates in cinematic crime stories, the archetypal outlaw
and lawman have remained stoically unchanged. There is, in every story of crime and
punishment, an outlaw who seeks some sort of redemption, and a lawman who will not
offer it.
The archetypal outlaw and his counterpart, the lawman, have been repackaged and
resold as different characters in “new” movies for more than a century. Despite their
apparent idiosyncrasies, each portrayal continues to display similar characteristics. We
know them so well that introductions are not necessary, a boon to writers who are spared
the hassle of drawing those lines in for us. Contemporary television shows and ﬁlms that
focus on imprisonment have also fostered the evolution of a clich éprison setting. The
success of these ﬁlms usually depends on the ability of their creators to emphasize the
macabre while minimizing the banal, thereby painting a skewed picture of the prison
industrial complex. We do not tune in to prisons on screen to see normal people living
boring lives; we turn in to see the monsters in our nightmares do awful things to one
another in conﬁned spaces far away from our living rooms.
3. The Archetypal Prison
The outlaw and the lawman are in place, but the stage must still be set. In prison
cinema, that stage is normally designed to ﬁt one of three archetypes, which I shall refer to
as prison-as-penance, prison as a playground, and prison as a paradox. Like the characters
we meet inside these cinematic spaces, the differences which appear to set each production
apart as original often disappear under scrutiny. Additionally, like those who occupy them,
the prisons we see on screen give us tools for understanding our world. Unfortunately,
the restricted nature of actual prison spaces makes it difﬁcult for viewers to compare what
they see on screen to real life, leaving us reliant on representations to make sense of our
world. Given Hollywood’s propensity to feed us what we demand—violence, mayhem
and drama in the case of prison cinema—it is only natural that we come to view prisons as
horriﬁc institutional spaces required in any functioning society, and as such, as the only
thing standing between us and the monsters we see on TV (Yousman 2009).
3.1. Prison-as-Penance
“I completed all the programs. I followed the rules. But I still wound up back in
prison.”
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 8 of 15
I heard this story dozens of times during my incarceration, and I continue to hear it
from my incarcerated students today. Given our ongoing crisis with recidivism, it’s easy to
see why. The most recent data is in line with US history: 82% of all released prisoners were
rearrested within 10 years of their release from prison, and 61% of all released prisoners
wound up back in prison between 2008-2018 (Antenangeli and Durose 2021). In the United
States, redemption has become the exception, not the rule. But those who ﬁnd themselves
stuck in the revolving door of criminal corrections seldom ﬁt the mold of stereotypical
monsters dreamed up by Hollywood. The Bureau of Justice Statistics has repeatedly found
that nearly half of all incarcerated people never receive a write-up for a rule violation
during their entire sentence (Stephen 1989; Steiner and Wooldredge 2008). Incarcerated
people frequently ask me to write letters of support to include with their requests for
entry into overburdened educational and recovery programs. Prisons are packed with
people who have been trying to earn redemption for decades only to be ultimately denied
it regardless of what they do.
The trope of prison-as-penance portrays the penitentiary as a terrible-yet-necessary
place where those who do awful things are sent for punishment. If they follow the rules
and change their ways, outlaws in penance stories are eventually allowed to leave their past
behind, while those who remain imprisoned indeﬁnitely are products of their own poor
decisions—bad guys of the worst sort designed to strike terror into the hearts of viewers.
The ultimate punishment—death—is the natural endpoint of prison-as-penance narratives.
Whether at the hands of state employees or others in prison, death looms over the heads of
the incarcerated as a reminder that more punishment is always available if one continues to
reject traditional redemption. The lawmen in penance narratives are depicted as good guys
who protect the public from those who would otherwise run amok and endanger us all.
Redemption in a prison-as-penance story is earned through successful navigation of
the prison space, which usually develops alongside a sincere sense of regret for one’s crimes,
an obvious change in one’s ways, and, eventually, a devotion to helping others avoid a
similar path in the future. Despite the violent prison environment with traps around every
corner, the redeemed outlaw in a prison-as-penance story learns something from their
incarceration that leads to a better life after release. Prison-as-penance reﬂects our cultural
understanding of outlaws, lawmen and prisons so well that it shows up at some point
in nearly all outlaw stories. Michel Foucault explained why in his groundbreaking work
Discipline and Punish , where he traces the evolution of laws that were originally designed
to exclude rule breakers from the larger social body through shame or death, but are now
designed to bring rule-breakers back into the social fold by enticing (disciplining) them
into conforming to social and cultural institutions (Foucault 1975). Prison-as-penance
exempliﬁes Foucault’s disciplinary apparatus aimed at producing self-regulation through
technologies of power: “the expiation that once rained down upon the body must be
replaced by a punishment that acts in depth upon the heart, the thoughts, the will, the
inclinations” (p. 16). The result is a change of “heart” leading to a new performance of
identity more in line with socially acceptable standards: prison-as-penance.
Prison-as-penance is more than just boring cells and squeaky bars. Often what the
outlaw experiences in prison cinema goes far beyond what we would normally consider
disciplinary, from torture to sexual assault sustained at the hands of other incarcerated
people, to outright murder. When the end result of such stories is a change of heart, viewers
are shown an image of prison as a successful tool of correction; it might be rough (at times
even torturous), but at least it is effective in forcing some bad people to reevaluate their
morals. Additionally, in those rare cases when even the worst punishment available fails to
change the outlaw’s ways and murder is not an appropriate option, prison-as-penance is
always willing to cage the worst bad guys until the day they die, protecting viewers from
the characters on screen who might otherwise haunt us in our sleep.
InConviction , outlaw Carl Upchurch completes his prison sentence and walks out a
changed man, abandoning his prior gang associations and eventually hosting a nationwide
peace summit in Kansas City (Sullivan 2002). In Dead Man Walking , prison-as-penance
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 9 of 15
plays out as the main character nears his execution date and ﬁnally confesses in the 11th
hour, painting prison and its ultimate end game—the death penalty—as effective tools
of closure when nothing else works (Robbins 1995). In Short Eyes , penance is delivered
not by state ofﬁcials, but by those in jail when a man who is guilty of abusing children
is about to be released because of faulty evidence, causing the outlaws-turned-lawmen
to step in and enforce punishment (murder) where the system is incapable (Young 1977).
InAmerican History X , violent sexual assault at the hands of other incarcerated people
initiates an unexpected change of heart in the main character, who then proceeds to ﬁght
against Neo-Nazi culture once released (Kaye 1998). In The Green Mile , we meet “Wild Bill”
Wharton, a man who celebrates his upcoming execution and even swings from the bars
screaming, “he’s frying now!” while his neighbor is in the electric chair (Darabont 1999).
Wharton reminds us that even though bad guys beyond redemption might exist, the prison
system always has an answer, up to and including death. When we are shown image after
image of prison as a place that keeps us safe from creepy characters who might otherwise
do us harm while rehabilitating those who are willing to change, what else can we do but
come to the conclusion that prison is a vital component for a functioning society? Without
that preexisting belief, such narratives would not make sense (Yousman 2009). Without the
constant ﬂow of “new” narratives, such beliefs would not be sustainable.
3.2. Prison as a Playground
Prison is many things, but most of them are boring.
The ﬁrst sixty days were the worst. Classiﬁed as “maximum security inmates” until
the prison administration completed a personalized security-threat evaluation, we were
locked up for 23 h each day. We left our cells for chow, for medical callouts, and for nothing
else. Books were hard to come by and seldom included both halves. Mail and phone calls
were restricted until we were classiﬁed and housed at a permanent facility. Property was
scarce because most of us were new arrivals with nothing but the clothes and bedding
handed out by the state when we arrived. Jackson was the absence of stimulation taken
to the extreme. Any movement outside what was requested was forbidden, and anyone
caught breaking the rules was immediately reassessed to a higher security level. There are
no playgrounds in prison.
In representations of prison as a playground, the rules that restrict the movements and
possessions of those in prison do not apply to a subset of incarcerated characters, often the
worst behaved in the facility. Playground depictions showcase incarcerated shot callers
who are not only immune to the regulations, but who can navigate the space of prison and
use it to achieve their often-wicked ends. Leonidas Cheliotis described the ﬁctional prison
setting as a place where:
Imagination tends to be taken on a sensational journey into spaces where the false
and the ﬁctional arise victorious from the ashes of the real. Prisons are usually
typecast either as dark institutions of perpetual horror and virulent vandalism or
idyllic holiday camps offering in-cell television and gourmet cuisine on the back
of taxpayers. (Cheliotis 2010, p. 175)
Playground depictions are on full display when sexual assault appears commonplace
and unpunished, when restricted items are easy to get, when ofﬁcers can be bribed or
blackmailed with ease, when escapes are carried out without much trouble, or when
orchestrated hits are put out against those in prison. Many of the characters in prison as a
playground thrive in the prison space, unbothered by the minor restrictions that do exist,
and always ready to commit additional crimes should an opportunity arise (it always does).
As viewers, we come to accept these depictions as representative of prison (Yousman 2013;
Brown 2009). We might believe them to be exaggerated or glamorized, but we also view
them as based on truths (De Certeau 1984; Yousman 2009). When the monsters on our
screens live in taxpayer-funded facilities where they can continue committing crimes and
victimizing others, how else can we respond except with disgust at the idea that prisons
simply are not tough enough? When guards regularly ignore their own safety to smuggle
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 10 of 15
in cellphones, drugs or even weapons, what else can we do but desire harsher security and
more restrictive rules (Yousman 2013).
Representations of prison as a playground are the bread and butter of movie producers.
In Shawshank, Red is the guy “who can get you anything” (Darabont 1994). In Goodfellas ,
Paulie has a stockpile of steak, lobster, cigars and liquor, all served alongside “meatballs
made with three kinds of meat: veal, beef and pork” (Scorsese 1990). As he explains, “wise
guys” do not really mind being sent to prison: “everyone else in the joint was doing real
time, all mixed together living like pigs . . .we owned the joint.” I Love you Phillip Morris is
packed with playground scenes, including men masturbating in public spaces and having
sex without restrictions, contraband being bought, sold, and handed out as gifts, and even
escapes that are so easy to pull off they become the central theme of the ﬁlm (Requa and
Ficarra 2009). In Prison Break , the main characters, who eventually break out, manage to
bribe guards, possess restricted items (including weapons), move around the prison freely,
dig a hole in the ﬂoor of the ofﬁcer break room, and constantly assault one another at
liberty (Scheuring 2005). In Breaking Bad , meth-kingpin “Heisenberg” manages to have
ten people who are locked up inside three different prisons killed within the span of just
a few minutes (MacLaren 2012). Prison as a playground paints an image of the criminal
justice system wherein incarcerated people are seldom contained (or containable), where
correctional ofﬁcers have neither the desire nor the ability to prevent them from committing
additional crimes, and where anything goes once one is in prison, a characterization that is
dialectically opposed to the way most folks feel that prisons ought to be managed.
Much of the violence in representations of prison as a playground is sexual in nature,
with the victimizers perpetrating their crimes at will and without penalty. There is a long
cinematic history of anti-LGBTQ+ sentiment; as hooks explains, “Homophobic construction
of gay sexual practice in mass media consistently reinforce the stereotypical notion that
gay folks are predators, eager to feast upon the innocent” (Hooks 1994, p. 16). It is even
worse in prison cinema, where viewers often expect to encounter a special kind of evil.
It is so common to see sexual assault in depictions of correctional environments that we
are seldom surprised when such storylines play out. Helen Eigenberg and Agnes Baro
found that “while most studies on male rape in prison suggest that it is a relatively rare
event,” in contemporary movies, “the inclusion of at least a reference to male rape and/or
a peripheral rape scene has become a standard part of prison ﬁlm production” (Eigenberg
and Baro 2003, pp. 64, 86). Dawn Cecil notes a similar thread running through women’s
prison ﬁlms: “These ‘babes-behind-bars’ ﬁlms perpetuate highly sexualized images of
female prisoners . . .they do not necessarily seek to educate—instead they aim to titillate”
(Cecil 2007, p. 305). In Prison Break , a character known as T-Bag regularly dominates others
by turning his pockets inside out and forcing victims to hold them while following him
around the yard, a move that would get you written up in any real prison (Scheuring
2005; Federal Bureau of Prisons 2012). In 2002, soft drink giant 7-Up ran a commercial
where a man hands out cans of soda between cell bars until he drops one and quips, “I’m
not picking that up,” a shout-out to the trope of sexual victimization around every corner
(Walker 2002). In Barbershop , when J.D. is told that someone else is going to prison for his
crime, he quips, “don’t drop the soap” (Story 2002). In prison ﬁlms, sex sells, especially if its
uninvited. In actual prisons, the rate of sexual assault hovers around 1.3% of incarcerated
people per year (Buehler 2021). The spectacle is misleading, to say the least.
The extreme storylines offered in prison cinema would not work if the space was not
already stocked with the bad guys Hollywood dreams up to turn out stomachs. Sexual
assault is commonplace and unpunished in playground ﬁlms, but it only happens because
many of those inside enjoy the sexual victimization of others. Prison riots and violent
murders only work when there are plenty of characters to do the assaulting. And those
characters are often superhuman in their strength, endurance and cruelty. In Fast & Furious
8, ex-cop Luke Hobbs gives us an image of prison as a playground when he is locked in
the same maximum-security facility as his archrival, Shaw (Gray 2017). The action in this
playground for hyperviolent men reaches a crescendo when Hobbs and Shaw are both
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 11 of 15
unexpectedly released from their cells and, of course, immediately begin ﬁghting with each
other, along with dozens of taser-wielding guards dressed in body armor. Since the trope
of prison as a playground relies on evil monsters who are always a threat to social order
and nearly impossible to subdue, producers opened all the cell doors along with those of
the two main characters, setting their cinematic monsters free. Unsurprisingly, all-out war
ensues when everyone comes charging out to immediately attack ofﬁcers and one another,
because that is what incarcerated people are like in the movies. A stereotypical Hollywood
prisoner is not only hyperviolent, but also hard to contain and incredibly strong, a trope
performed by Hobbs when a guard shoots him with a beanbag shotgun and the bullets
bounce off his chest without injury. He quips, “beanbag shotgun; big mistake,” then throws
one guard across the room and shoots another with his own gun.
Prison as a playground tempts viewers to stay tuned in with stories about our worst
fears come to life. The redeemed outlaw in a playground ﬁlm is stuck in the box of penance,
where they must navigate the penitentiary and survive constant threats to safety and
integrity. However, one man’s penance is frequently another man’s playground, and
producers have learned well that viewers eat up the drama of unwritten rules, confusing
victimization, and counterproductive rehabilitation in prison ﬁlms. Prisons on screen do
not contain or reform their residents; they make them more dangerous, antisocial and
heartless. Enter the trope of prison as a paradox.
3.3. Prison as a Paradox
“You are Inmate Boyce, 470236? Is that correct?”
Parole hearings are the most terrifying part of incarceration for most people, far more
threatening than showers, the chow hall, or the prison yard. The three-person panel was
tasked with deciding whether I deserved a shot at early release—at redemption—and
they were well prepared. Each member had two folders, a thick one packed with my
criminal past of arrests for hustling and stealing, and another one, thinner than the ﬁrst,
that contained my institutional history. I had just a single ticket over the course of the
prior year, and as one member quickly pointed out, I had managed to complete one of
the prison’s only educational programs—a typing class. I’d also forwarded them a letter
confessing my addiction and expressing my sincere desire to continue my recovery after
release. I was only 25 years old, and I’d been locked up for a few of those years, so despite
an impressive record of convictions, they’d all come over a relatively short period of time.
The board said a few more words about their concern for community safety and “offender
rehabilitation,” then they sent me on my way to make their decision in private.
A few weeks later, my release papers showed up; I’d been deemed an acceptable risk.
According to the Federal Bureau of Prisons, incarceration should serve the two-fold
purpose of threat containment and threat reduction (rehabilitation):
. . .to protect society by confining offenders in the controlled environments of
prisons and . . .[to] provide work and other self-improvement opportunities to assist
offenders in becoming law-abiding citizens. (US Federal Bureau of Prisons 2022)
The trope of prison as a paradox ﬂips these stated goals to their opposites, painting
prison as a space that expands threats and increases criminality. The end result of paradox
narratives is an understanding of prison as a dysfunctional institution that worsens any
problems it claims to solve.
Prison cinema often plays on all our worst fears and our deepest frustrations with
human nature. On-screen prisons are not just cages. Once the script is memorized and the
cameras are rolling, prisons become magical spaces of terror and spectacle where viewers
can travel at will without fear of physical harm or emotional trauma.2In those spaces,
we are primed to accept the bizarre and expect the extreme. Aiming to please, bizarre
and extreme is exactly what producers and writers feed us, knowing we are unlikely to
challenge storylines that would strike us as unbelievable if set anywhere outside of prison.
As a result, we often come to understand prison as a paradox: as a place where people who
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 12 of 15
commit crimes are sent for rehabilitation only to wind up more prone to criminality and
victimization than before they were arrested.
InThe Shawshank Redemption , the warden recruits the outlaw as an illegal accountant,
showing an image of prison where crime is not only allowed, but encouraged by those
in charge (Darabont 1994). Both Life(Demme 1999) and Cool Hand Luke (Rosenberg 1967)
include ﬁght scenes where the main outlaw is beaten by one of the largest men in the prison
in full view of prison ofﬁcials, providing an image of prison as a place where violence
is encouraged and ﬁghting is normalized. In Short Eyes , the prison administration fails
to prevent incarcerated characters from committing a group murder, showing an image
of jail where an arrest for minor crimes can inevitably lead to participation in organized
killing (Young 1977). By season three of Oz, Tobias Beecher, who is sent to prison for a
drunk driving accident resulting in someone’s death, has been transformed from a peaceful
man into a throat-slashing murderer, painting prison as a space that, as Damien Echols has
said, can “send a man to prison for writing bad checks and then torment him there until
he becomes a violent offender” (Fontana 2003; Echols 2012, p. 14). Within ﬁve minutes of
arriving at his ﬁrst prison in Blood In Blood Out , young outlaw Milko is sexually assaulted
and forced to join a gang that eventually crafts him into a stereotypical violent recidivist
(Hackford 1993). People do not go to prisons like these to become contributing members of
society; they go there to learn new tricks and experience new traumas. The paradoxical
nature of such scenes leaves viewers with the impression that those who have been to
prison are worse when they get out than they were when they went in.
Prison as a paradox reminds us, wrongly, that despite its claims of containing threats
and rehabilitating redeemable outlaws, prison often increases the social threat of criminality.
Representations of prison as a twisted game where villains enforce confusing rules and
victimize others for unclear reasons paint the correctional space as fraught with danger
around every corner and incapable of offering effective rehabilitation of any sort. For
the victimizers, prison is painted as a playground for sadistic behavior. For their victims,
prison is painted as torturous penance. However, for the viewer of such stories, prison is
transformed into a paradoxical trap—a place where the incarcerated must learn to victimize
others if they are to avoid becoming victims themselves. Any time characters inside a
cinematic prison ﬂaunt the rules to constantly hurt one another, viewers must contend
with the paradox of an expensive prison system that neither contains threats to social
order nor rehabilitates offenders, the two claimed goals of criminal corrections. Unlike
representations of prison-as-penance or prison as a playground, prison as a paradox opens
a space for viewers to reconsider the effectiveness of the criminal justice system. That
is why producers usually slide out of paradox representations and back into the more
comfortable ground of playground or penance by the conclusion of most stories.
4. Updating the Spectacle
We learn from media whether we want to or not. What we learn comes to inform our
perspective of the world, and our ability to understand it and explain it to others (Yousman
2009, 2013; Hooks 1994; Dixon 2017; Donovan and Klahm 2015). When the spaces we learn
about on screen are restricted from public oversight, the spectacle becomes conﬂated with
our understanding of the world. Even in spaces where most of us can easily verify what
we see on television or ﬁlm, we usually do not bother to do so. How often have you looked
for the hatch in the roof of an elevator only to realize it does not exist, glanced at an air
vent in an ofﬁce and thoughts, “a human couldn’t crawl through that,” or witnessed an
actual police standoff and realized they do not yell, “cover me!” and run into the line of
ﬁre? Probably more than once, and those are spaces many of us can access on a regular
basis. All the worse when it comes to prisons, which most of us never have the opportunity
or the desire to enter in person.
Our cultural understanding of prison and incarceration is aligned with our cultural
demand for updated spectacles and repackaged stories of mayhem and murder. We learn
about drugs, crime and punishment from our televisions and movies, and what we learn is
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 13 of 15
often a far cry from reality. Our media reﬂects a culture obsessed with mass incarceration,
which has become a permanent staple of US life. Any change in our cultural understanding
of crime and punishment must begin and end with a cultural update in our representations
of crime and punishment. Until we come to see those in prison as worthy of redemption
and capable of achievement, we will continue to demand the same stereotypical spectacles.
And until the spectacles are updated to reﬂect our demand for humanity, we will continue
to view those behind bars as occasional outlaws amongst hordes of villains.
What, then, can producers do to draw an audience? If mayhem and murder are what
sells, how can we expect salespeople to peddle less popular products? The answer is not to
do away with the spectacle, but to update it. The revolution has already begun, and it does
not require irredeemable ghouls to keep us tuned in.
The world of podcasting offers some rich examples. The award-winning Ear Hustle ,
hosted by people who are (or who have been) incarcerated and recorded inside San Quentin
Prison, currently has nine seasons available for download. Ear Hustle is devoted to sharing
the stories of incarcerated people who are working for change. Episodes feature true-crime
narratives from guests, along with the real stories of those in prison: their histories, their
accomplishments, and their ongoing attempts are redemption. The University of Denver
Prison Arts Initiative has been recording and releasing episodes of its prison-based podcast
With(in) since 2019, focusing on the stories and pathways to success of those inside Colorado
prisons. The topics might at times be titillating and salacious, but they are also personal
and humanized, told by those who lived them and expanded beyond the criminal charges
which the world often uses to deﬁne those of us who have been to prison. Such productions
feed our desire for the taboo, but they do so in a way that paints those in prison as humans
who made mistakes and who are capable of redemption. They are part of a new wave of
productions that present what Nellis has called “The newly emergent ‘convict criminology,’
produced in the USA by ex-cons (usually imprisoned as a result of the ‘war on drugs’) who
have subsequently become academics” (Nellis 2009, p. 144).
New prison narratives like Ear Hustle and With(in) also focus on the various ways
the current design of the system makes redemption difﬁcult while sharing stories of those
who have overcome the odds against them and worked to change their lives. Of course,
many of us manage to avoid the trap of recidivism after we are released. Many of us,
myself included, do more than that. We build careers. We earn degrees. We reenter prison
as educators, counselors and program directors. And all of it has an air of drama—that
Hollywood magic that comes with prison walls and razor wire on screen. We can have it
both ways; we can demand productions that humanize those in prison while also enjoying
the interesting stories about how they got there, and how they get out.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interests.
Notes
1The ﬁlm versions vary from one another. For example, the 1978 version depicted Valjean escaping from Toulon Prison, not
gaining his parole, and he spends his life ﬂeeing from the original charges, whereas the 2012 version depicts Valjean breaking his
parole and creating a new identity in response to the gift of silver. The original novel begins with his parole, not his escape.
2Understandably, many of us cannot travel to the space of prison ﬁlm without (re)experiencing trauma.
References
Abu-Jamal, Mumia. 1995. Live from Death Row . New York: Avon.
Adorno, Theodor, and Max Horkheimer. 1947. Dialectic of Enlightenment . Translated by John Cumming. New York: Seabury Press.
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 14 of 15
Aldrich, Robert. 1974. The Longest Yard (ﬁlm). Hollywood: Paramount Pictures.
Alexander, Michelle. 2010. The New Jim Crow: Mas Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness . New York: The New Press.
Antenangeli, Leonardo, and Matthew Durose. 2021. Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 24 States in 2008: A Ten-Year Follow-Up Period
(2008–2018) . Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Benjamin, Walter. 1935. The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction. In Illuminations . Edited by Hannah Arendt. Translated
by Harry Zohn. New York: Schocken Books.
Berg, Alec, Bill Hader, and Aida Rodgers. 2018. Barry (television series). New York: Home Box Ofﬁce (HBO).
Bischoff, Samuel. 1932. The Last Mile (ﬁlm). Hollywood: KBS Productions.
Blackton, Stuart. 1909. Les Mis érables (ﬁlm). New York: Vitagraph Company of America.
Bright, Charles. 1996. The Powers that Punish: Prison and Politics in the Era of the ‘Big House’, 1920–1955 . Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Brown, Michelle. 2009. The Culture of Punishment: Prison, Society and Spectacle . New York: New York University Press.
Buehler, Emily. 2021. Sexual Victimization Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2016–2018 . Washington, DC: Department of Justice, Bureau
of Justice Statistics.
Carpenter, John. 1981. Escape from New York (ﬁlm). Los Angeles: AVCO Embassy.
Cecil, Dawn K. 2007. Looking Beyond Caged Heat: Media Images of Women in Prison. Feminist Criminology 2: 304–326. [CrossRef]
Cerone, Daniel, Sara Colleton, Charles Eglee, John Goldwyn, Michael Hall, Chip Johannessen, Clyde Phillips, James Manos Jr., Manny
Coto, Wendy West, and et al. 2006. Dexter (television series). Miami: Showtime.
Cheliotis, Leonidas K. 2010. The Ambivalent Consequences of Visibility: Crime and Prisons in the Mass Media. Crime, Media, Culture 6:
169–84. [CrossRef]
Cline, Edward, and Buster Keaton. 1920. Convict 13 (ﬁlm). Jacksonville: Metro Pictures.
Coen, Joel. 2000. Oh Brother, Where Art Thou? (ﬁlm). Hollywood: Universal Pictures.
Darabont, Frank. 1994. The Shawshank Redemption (ﬁlm). Los Angeles: Columbia Pictures.
Darabont, Frank. 1999. The Green Mile (ﬁlm). Beverley Hills: Castle Rock Entertainment.
Dargis, Manohla. 2012. The Wretched Lift Their Voices: ‘Les Mis érables’ Stars Anne Hathaway and Hugh Jackman. The New York
Times . December 24 Digital Edition. Available online: https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/25/movies/les-miserables-stars-
anne-hathaway-and-hugh-jackman.html (accessed on 28 December 2022).
De Certeau, Michel. 1984. The Practice of Everyday Life . Berkely: University of California Press.
Demme, Ted. 1999. Life(ﬁlm). Los Angeles: Universal Pictures.
Dixon, Travis. 2017. Good Guys Are Still Always in White? Positive Change and Continued Misrepresentation of Race and Crime on
Local Television News. Communication Research 44. [CrossRef]
Donovan, Kathleen, and Charles Klahm IV . 2015. The Role of Entertainment Media in Perceptions of Police Use of Force. Criminal
Justice and Behavior 42: 1261–81. [CrossRef]
Echols, Damien. 2012. Life After Death . New York: Blue Rider Press.
Eigenberg, Helen, and Agnes Baro. 2003. If you Drop the Soap in the Shower you are on your own: Images of Male Rape in Selected
Prison Movies. Sexuality and Culture 7: 56–89. [CrossRef]
Federal Bureau of Prisons. 2012. Inmate Information Handbook. Available online: https://www.bop.gov/locations/institutions/spg/
SPG_aohandbook.pdf (accessed on 12 December 2022).
Fontana, Tom. 2003. Oz(TV show). HBO Studios. Burbank: Warner Brothers.
Foucault, Michel. 1975. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison . Translated by Alan Sheridan. New York: Vintage Books.
Frankenheimer, John. 1962. Birdman of Alcatraz (ﬁlm). Beverly Hills: United Artists.
Gray, F. Gary. 2017. Fate of the Furious, F8, Fast and Furious 8 (titles used in the ﬁlm). Hollywood: Universal Studies.
Gross, Terry. 2013. Fresh Air . Washington, DC: NPR Radio, August 13.
Hackford, Taylor. 1993. Blood in Blood out: Bound by Honor (ﬁlm). Hollywood: Hollywood Pictures.
Hillyer, Lambert. 1939. Convict’s Code (ﬁlm). Los Angeles: Crescent Pictures Corporation.
Hooks, Bell. 1994. Outlaw Culture: Resisting Representations . New York: Routledge Press.
Hooks, Bell. 1996. Reel to Real: Race, Class and Sex at the Movies . New York: Routledge Press.
Hooper, Tom. 2012. Les Mis érables (ﬁlm). Universal City: Universal Studios.
Hugo, Victor. 1862. Les Mis érables . Paris: A. Lacroix, Verboeckhoven & Cie.
Jaffé, Aniela. 1964. Sacred Symbols: The Stone and the Animal. In Man and his Symbols . Edited by Carl Jung. New York: Dell-Random
House Publishing.
Jung, Carl. 1964. Man and his Symbols . New York: Dell-Random House Publishing.
Kaye, Tony. 1998. American History X (ﬁlm). Burbank: New Line Cinema.
Kohan, Jenji. 2013–2019. Orange if the New Black (television series). Los Gatos: Netﬂix.
Lee, Rowland. 1934. The Count of Monte Cristo (ﬁlm). Mumbai: Reliance Pictures.
Litvak, Anatole. 1840. Castle on the Hudson (ﬁlm). Burbank: Warner Brothers Studios.
Lurie, Rod. 2001. The Last Castle (ﬁlm). Nashville: Robert Lawrence Productions.
MacLaren, Michelle. 2012. Breaking Bad (television series), season 5, episode 8: “Gliding All Over”. Culvers City: Sony Pictures
Television.
Humanities 2023 ,12, 10 15 of 15
Martinson, Robert. 1974. What Works? Questions and Answers about Prison Reform. The Public Interest 35: 22–54.
Miller, Matt, Dom Nero, and Brady Langmann. 2021. No Way Home is Good, but not the Best Spiderman Movie Ever. Esquire , December 17.
Nellis, Mike. 2009. The Aesthetics of Redemption: Released Prisoners in American Film and Literature. Theoretical Criminology 13:
129–46. [CrossRef]
Odenkirk, Bob. 2006. Let’s Go to Prison! (ﬁlm). Universal City: Universal Pictures.
Page, Allison, and Laurie Ouellette. 2019. The Prison-Televisual Complex. International Journal of Cultural Studies 23: 121–37. [CrossRef]
Requa, John, and Glenn Ficarra. 2009. I Love you Phillip Morris (ﬁlm). Los Angeles: L.D. Entertainment.
Robbins, Tim. 1995. Dead Man Walking (ﬁlm). Universal City: Gramercy Pictures.
Rosenberg, Stuart. 1967. Cool Hand Luke (ﬁlm). Burbank: Warner Brothers Studio.
Scheuring, Paul. 2005. Prison Break (television show). Los Angeles: 20th Century Fox Television.
Scorsese, Martin. 1990. Goodfellas (ﬁlm). Burbank: Warner Brothers.
Siegel, Don. 1979. Escape from Alcatraz (ﬁlm). San Francisco: Paramount Pictures.
Steiner, Benjamin, and John Wooldredge. 2008. Inmate Versus Environmental Effects on Prison Rule Violation. Criminal Justice and
Behavior 35: 438–56. [CrossRef]
Stephen, James. 1989. Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report: Prison Rule Violators . Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Bureau
of Justice Statistics.
Story, Tim. 2002. Barbershop (ﬁlm). Beverly Hills: MGM Distribution.
Sullivan, Kevin. 2002. Conviction (ﬁlm). Hollywood: Paramount.
Thornton, Billie Bob. 1996. Sling Blade (ﬁlm). Hollywood: Miramax Films.
Thorpe, Richard. 1957. Jail House Rock (ﬁlm). Beverly Hills: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.
US Federal Bureau of Prisons. 2022. A Foundation Build on Solid Ground: Mission. Available online: https://www.bop.gov/about/
agency/agency_pillars.jsp (accessed on 22 December 2022).
Walker, Rob. 2002. Unapologetic 7 Up. Slate Magazine , May 29.
Wioszczyna, Susan. 2013. Merciless Critics Lead the ‘Les Mis’ Rebellion. USA Today , January 24.
Young, Robert. 1977. Short Eyes (ﬁlm). New York: Film League.
Yousman, Bill. 2009. Inside Oz: Hyperviolence, Race and Class Nightmares, and the Engrossing Spectacle of Terror. Communication and
Critical/Cultural Studies 6: 265–84. [CrossRef]
Yousman, Bill. 2013. Challenging the Media-Incarceration Complex through Media Education. In Working for Justice: A Handbook of
Prison Education and Activism . Edited by Stephen J. Hartnett, Eleanor Novek and Jennifer Wood. Chicago: University of Illinois
Press, pp. 141–60.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
