Shawshank_Video_Essay
In repo

THE SHAWSHANKREDEMPTION
T ue, 11/18/2014 - 11:30Samuel GoldwynTheatre 8949 Wilshire BoulevardBeverly Hills, CA 90211SHAREIn person: Frank Darabont,Morgan Freeman and Tim Robbins.Moderated by Max Brooks.20th Anniversary ScreeningScreenwriter Frank Darabont madehis feature directing debut with anOscar-nominated adaptation ofStephen King’s novella Rita Hayworthand Shawshank Redemption, and over thelast twenty years, this gripping story ofhope and courage has become one ofthe most beloved ﬁlms of its time.Tim Robbins stars as Andy Dufresne,a young banker falsely convicted of themurder of his wife and her lover, whofaces unthinkable brutality as an inmateof Shawshank State Prison.Andy’s accounting skills andhis friendship with a more experiencedprisoner, Ellis Boyd 'Red' Reddingplayed by Morgan Freeman help keephim alive in the hostile setting.However, an unforgivable betrayal leadshim to plot an impossible escape. Forhis directing debut, Darabontassembled a top-notch supporting castwith a memorable performance by thegreat James Whitmore as a longtimeconvict. Darabont was also aided byRoger Deakins’ starkcinematography , Richard Francis-Bruce’s tense editing and ThomasNewman’s emotional score, which allearned Oscar nominations. 1994, 143 minutes, color, 35mm | W ritten and directedby Frank Darabont; based on the novella RitaHayworth and Shawshank Redemption by StephenKing; with Tim Robbins, Morgan Freeman, BobGunton, William Sadler, Clancy Brown, Gil Bellows,Mark Rolston, James Whitmore.
A modern American classic celebrated its 20th anniversary in high style at the Academy onNovember 18, 2014, when cast and crew members reunited at a special screening of TheShawshank Redemption hosted by W orld W ar Z author Max Brooks. Nominated for sevenAcademy Awards, the ﬁlm was released in the fall of 1994 and marked the feature directorialdebut of its screenwriter, Frank Darabont. The ﬁlm was based on a Stephen Kingnovella entitled Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption, originally published in 1982 in thecollection Diﬀerent Seasons. (Read Stephen King’s thoughts on the ﬁlm here.)Darabont’s ﬁrst eﬀort behind the camera also was a King adaptation, a 30-minute ﬁlm basedon the short story “The W oman in the Room”; it was made with the help of the novelist’s“dollar baby” policy of granting permission to select ﬁlmmakers and students to adapt one ofhis stories for one dollar. Darabont went on to write and direct two more features fromKing’s body of work, The Green Mile (1999) and The Mist (2007), and called the novelist “apatron saint to my career.”On stage at the sold-out Samuel Goldwyn Theater (with the enthusiastic audience givingtwo standing ovations) were Darabont and the two leads cast in the pivotal roles ofShawshank prison inmates Andy Dufresne and Red: Tim Robbins, who had just appearedin Robert Altman’s Short Cuts and The Player, and Morgan Freeman in his follow-up role toUnforgiven. Both actors reminisced about seizing the chance to act in the ﬁlm based on thestrength of what Robbins termed “the impenetrably perfect script.” After making a pair ofhigh-proﬁle horror ﬁlms, Darabont explained that he wrote Shawshank to avoid becomingtypecast in a genre already ﬁlled with maestros, though he had originally intended his ﬁrstfeature to be The Mist. The ﬁlm gathered an impressive ensemble of actors and technicians,many of whom were in attendance for the evening. (See the gallery below.)The majority of the ﬁlm’s production took place in Ohio, an area where the trio recalledbeing surrounded by good people, hail, heat and tornadoes; Robbins in particular wasthankful for the ﬁnal scene (one that was not in the original script, but suggested by CastleRock executives), which allowed them to wrap up the three-month shoot in St. Croix. Both actors also recalled the most diﬃcult scene they had to shoot, in which Robbinsemerges from a sewage pipe into an Ohio creek in the middle of “cow country .” (Fortunately ,showers were readily available.) Freeman and Darabont also remembered shooting anextensive panic attack scene near the end of the ﬁlm, which was cut from the ﬁnal versionafter test screening audiences indicated that they wanted Red to get to that pivotal tree rightaway .The ﬁlm didn't ﬁnd its target audience at ﬁrst, but positive word of mouth soon spread andmade Shawshank one of the most beloved ﬁlms of its era. Darabont, Robbins and Freemannoted that the ascendance of the ﬁlm’s reputation was gradual, but its fans around the globenow include residents of rural China and none other than the late Nelson Mandela. Some ofthe funniest mispronunciations of the title (found in the video gallery below) over the yearshave come from this remarkable diverse fanbase. Darabont, Robbins and Freeman, who individually have created impressive bodies of work,were delighted to reﬂect upon some of their lesser-known projects, and each named one ﬁlmthey wished more people would see. (Respectively they are The Majestic, Cradle Will Rock andBopha!) They also continue to keep the spirit of the Shawshank alive through their artistryand outside activities. Robbins still teaches acting to prison inmates, who are often surprisedto ﬁnd him in their company . “They love that movie,” Robbins said of Shawshank. “Guards,not so much!”VIDEOS & PHOTOSTHE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION - 20TH ANNIVERSARY SCREENINGHOME/EVENTS/THE SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION
©2026 ACADEMY OF MOTION PICTURE ARTS AND SCIENCES ABOUTCONTACTLEGALPRIVACYSITE MAPCAREERSPRESSSOCIALVISIT THE LARGEST MUSEUM IN THE WORLD DEDICATED TO THE ART OF MOVIEMAKING — THE ACADEMY MUSEUM
AWARDS/INDUSTRYMUSEUM/COLLECTIONSUPPORT AND SHOPLEARNNEWSSEARCHMEMBERS LOGIN
