29.salini-k-article.pdf
https://tlhjournal.com/uploads/products/29.salini-k-article.pdf

www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 252 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
A Psychological Reading of Dennis Lehane’s Shutter Island
Salini K
Research Scholar
University of Calicut
Tenhipalam, Kerala, India
Abstract
Shutter Island(2003) is a psychological thriller novel that explores the various conflicts that
happen within the human psyche. This paper is a detailed analysis on how trauma, guilt and
repression cause mental disorder by looking into the fine line between normal defense
mechanism s and psychotic tendencies. By taking the protagonist of the nove l Andrew
Laeddis as an example , this paper will explore the eternal battle between the Id and the
superego and will try to understand how ego‟s attempts at creating a balance is often led to
complete collapse of sanity.
Keywords : Trauma, Guilt, Repression , Psyche, Defense Mechanisms
Introduction:
The 1923 personality theory of Sigmund Freud divided the psyche into three defining
elements, the Id ( Es), the ego ( Ich), and the superego ( Uberich ), these three areas spread
themselves out into the unconscious, the subconscious, and the conscious. The Id is the
impulsive and unconscious part of our mind which is present from early childhood. It remains
in this infantile stage all its life. Its needs, desires, and motives remain immature; this is
because the Id ha s no contact with the outside world. Much like an infant, the Id remains cut
off from the moral structure s that define the society . The Id functions by the pleasure
principle. “Pleasure principle aims at the immediate discharge of accumulating tensions
which typically results in hallucinatory gratification” (Lear 255). The superego is the part of
the psyche that only develops in the final stage. Further divided into the ego ideal and the
conscience, the superego analyses each of the Id‟s wishes based on soc iety‟s expectations and
decides whether it is to be followed or not. While the ego ideal acts as a standard by which
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 253 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
the ego‟s actions are analysed, the conscience possesses the crucial power to impact guilt,
which, in cases of an unbalanced psyche, “plays a decisive economic part and puts the most
powerful obstacles in the way of recovery” (Freud 11 ). The ego, acts as a mediator,
positioning itself between the Id and the superego. While the Id relies on impulsive
motivations, the ego functions based on pur e rationality. “The ego follows the reality
principle. The reality principle seeks realistic gratifications of wishful impulses and desires”
(256). It is responsible for keeping a check on the id, serving not two, but “three severe
masters and has to do it s best to reconcile the claims and demands of all three. These
demands are always divergent and often seem quite incompatible; no wonder that the ego so
frequently gives way under its task. The three tyrants ar e the external world, the super ego,
and the id” (110). The ego, if failed to abide by the reality principle, will start functioning
many defense mechanisms to evade anxiety.
Freud‟s discovery of the concept of defense was a turning point in the field of
Psychology. In his work Ego mechanism of defe nse, he identified the five most important
properties of defense mechanisms, from “managing instinct and affect, being unconscious
and indicative of major psychiatric syndromes to being adaptive as well as pathological” (4 ).
The first defense mechanism th at Freud discovered was Repression, „the Queen of all
defenses‟ or the „cornerstone of psychoanalysis, which is often referred to by the layman as
“„convenient forgetting‟, where the person forgets, either consciously or unconsciously, those
things which r emind him of his inadequacies”, (Hurlock 409). It blocks a threatening idea, a
traumatic memory, or a frightening childhood experience from entering the consciousness.
As C. Hull remarks, it is “one of the methods by which the ego tries to counteract or ma ster
an impending disaster or threat by adopting a method of denial, falsification or distortion of
reality instead of adopting realistic problem -solving methods” ( “Repression: Concepts,
kinds ”).
Psychological Reading of the Novel
The novel Shutter Island was published in 2003 by Harper Collins. Set in a gothic
environment, the novel takes the reader to an uncanny and chilling inner battle, fought by the
protagonist Andrew Laeddis. The story is set on an island called Shutter, which was once a
hideou t of pirates and thieves. The menacing presence of the sea hangs threateningly over the
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 254 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
islanders, along with a grave lighthouse that glimmers in the light of an age -old conspiracy.
The Ashecliff hospital for the criminally insane is located right at the h eart of the island and it
gives the required gothic element to the novel. The sea has a sinister role throughout; it is
described as a trap, nothing leaves the island; the waves bring them back just the same way
they went out to the sea. The environment it self hints at the psychological tension and mental
confinement of a tormented human mind through many such visible symbols.
Andrew Laeddis was a US marshal, who was forced to participate in World War II.
The war left a deep scar on his conscience, as he was forced to compromise his humanity for
the sake of his nation. The novel explores the thin line between the dark and the light within
each human being. “God loves violence. There is no moral order at all. There is only „can my
violence conquer yours?‟” (Lehane 279). When a person witnesses the horrors of the violence
he is capable of, either he loses the entire command over his superego, sinking deeper into a
life tainted with the murderous desires of Id, or accepts the punishment of the superego and
gets pierced with the pangs of guilt. Michael Shreiner, in his essay analysing Freud‟s
psychoanalytic theory, discusses this victory of one over the other:
When the Id won, the individual felt satisfied but culture and civilization, all
the higher aims of human existence, paid for it. When the superego won the
individual felt thwarted, but the culture and civilization, all the higher aims of
human existence, were protected and could continue to advance… People
could get their instinctive needs satisfied onl y at the expense of civilization,
and civilization could flourish only at the expense of their instinctive needs
(“Id versus Superego”).
According to a research conducted by Jeremiah A. Schumm, Ph.D. and Kathleen M.
Chard, Ph.D., for the National Institu te on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, supported by the
Department of Veteran Affairs, United States, military -related trauma, often leads to
alcoholism and simultaneously PTSD in a minor yet significant group among the war
veterans. They suggest that the ind ividual could be diagnosed with PTSD if he or she
repeatedly undergoes the following actions, i.e., re -experiencing the war -related traumatic
events through nightmares or flashbacks, arousal, that is startle or get sleep disturbances, and
avoidance through withdrawing from people and laces that reminds the person of the war, or
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 255 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
those who try to chain the person to the reality (“PTSD and Alcohol use”). Throughout the
story, Andrew is reminded of his war days. Even after returning, he was not able to reclaim a
normal life, he avoided his family and the people around him so that he could, successfully,
yet unhealthily, withdraw from the trauma of his past. The relief he found was through
alcohol. It was Andrew‟s inability to deal with the trauma that rendered h im powerless.
Addiction is described as a defensive strategy to avoid the feeling of helplessness, a mere
attempt at self -regulation by the individual to cope with the anxiety that emerged from the
threats of the Id and the helplessness of the ego. Immerse d in his own mental shambles,
Andrew wasn't able to give due attention to his family. Until then he was only going through
minor anxiety, which he could have overcome in the course of time. But his ignorance of the
things around him made him pay a bigger p rice, his family, his life, reputation, and ultimately
his sanity. His wife, Dolores Chanal was by then a bipolar patient. Due to her husband‟s
continuous neglect and a lack of proper treatment, she was already at the maniacal heights of
violence and suici dal tendencies.
Deranged by the illness Dolo res drowns their children in the nearby lake, leaving
Andrew to deal with their dead bodies. With the repulsive horror of what happened due to his
ignorance and the consequent self -hatred, Andrew reaches a junc ture, the most crucial point
for his own psychological journey. Appalled by his wife‟s action and tormented by his own
ignorance, Andrew slowly loses the little command he had over his mental strength. The
monstrous desire to end this all using the violenc e that he knew he was capable of was one
choice, the one commanded by the Id, the sudden release o f all tension, through Freud‟s
pleasure p rinciple. To accept what he has done and face the consequences of his wife‟s illness
and the loss of his children was another, the one favoured by the superego, which is in
harmony with his moral values as well as t he external rules, through the reality p rinciple. But
at the same time accepting that would only mean how badly he failed his ego ideal. Triggered
by hatred, towards himself and his ignorance that transcends the limits of self -restraint and
clouds the ability of judgment, he finally succumbs to the former option, shooting his wife
and hence liberating her of her illness. By the analysis of Michael Shreiner, thi s scene is
significant due to its exactness in mitigating the Pyrrhic victory of the Id over the superego.
The only logical conclusion that we can draw from Andrew‟s action is that his ego acted out
in favour of the Id and thus opened an opportunity for th e superego to execute its punishment
of instilling guilt. The superego that revolved around strict morals and values couldn‟t accept
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 256 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
what the ego had done, “since the actions of the ego deviated largely from the ego ideal, the
Freudian notion of a perfect or ideal self -housed in the superego” (Rosenthal 102).
Although Freud used both the terms ego ideal and ideal ego indiscriminately, his own
analysis in Civilzation, Society and Religion of the ego ideal as the heir to the original
narcissism in which the childish ego enjoyed self -sufficiency can help us understand
Andrew‟s consequent spiralling into psychosis (139). This “ identification with an over
idealized self - and object -representat ion, with the primitive form of ego -ideal” can help us
understand how the excessive development of narcissistic character defenses results from an
exacerbation of the early infantile ego ideal as a defense against fear and guilt over mul tiple
conflicts (Ke rnberg 239,240).
Carl Jung, the founder of Analytical Psychology, in Psychology and Religion defines
guilt as “a cheap substitute for legitimate suffering” (qtd. in Flaherty 107). Guilt is a
necessary aspect of the psychological process. With the courage to accept the consequences,
one may restore the balance with some effort, at the same time, without this courage, guilt
could be a malignant co -traveller who could deliver you to the doorsteps of neurosis. With
the death of his wife, Andrew could no longe r live his true identity, to escape from the strong
guilt he associated with „Andrew‟; he had to create a new self. Repressing a single memory
itself can be complicated as it is never really gone, then repressing all the memories
associated with an identit y and hence trying to forget the identity itself is a form of self -
destruction, an abnormal repression. As repression is never absolute, these memories of his
real self come back through hallucinations and dreams.
Connecting her own views on the role of sh ame with Freud, Helen Block Lewis, in
her essay „Shame, Repression, Field Dependence, and Psychopathology‟ explains that
irrational guilt often leads to neurosis. According to Freud, the patient considers himself not
as guilty but as ill. Adding to this, L ewis explains undischarged shame as the emotional force
that fuels guilt enough to justify an unnatural anger (qtd. in Singer 233). In his newly created
identity and life, as Teddy Daniels, Andrew makes sure to invent an antagonist of the name
Andrew, to w hom his unnatural anger is channelled. In his new identity, he was a US marshal
and a childless widower whose wife was killed by pyromaniac Andrew Laeddis. Otto
Fenichel explains the role of guilt with the help of Shakespeare‟s Macbeth , where Macbeth,
to reduce the severity of his guilt used the witches as alternate figures to share his burden.
Fenichel‟s description of the sharing of guilt is thus:
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 257 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
Frequent in occurrences are attempts at projecting guilt feelings. “Someone
else has done it, not I” is the leitmotif of many a neurotic character. There are
different types of quasi -projections of guilt feelings. Any guilt can be borne
more easily if someone else has done the same thing… persons who either
have done something for which they feel guilty… feel gr eatly relieved if they
succeed in finding someone who does or had done the same deed. (165)
Teddy‟s relentless efforts to find pyromaniac Andre Laeddis thus have two significant
meanings. Firstly, the attempt by a loving husband to find the killer of hi s wife. This would
render Teddy as a hero, the ideal self, that he so longs to achieve. Secondly, this could be the
feeble attempt of the real Andrew buried deep within the new Teddy in finding a fake
character who could share his unaccounted guilt.
The arrangement of the fantasy itself is a tool to analyse the disparity between
Andrew‟s unconscious and conscious mind. Andrew Laeddis, the repressed personality,
could be considered as representing the Id, the one who committed the crime, the one who
ought to be punished. Teddy Daniels, the new personality, could be considered as the
superego or perhaps the ego ideal, the one abiding by the rules defined by the superego. The
real Andrew, lost in between these two selves, tries relentlessly to attain the much desired
integrated self. Adding more complication to this instability, the superego‟s anger towards the
Id has manifested itself as a destructive sort of revenge that Teddy felt towards Andrew. This
meant that Teddy will always engage in a search for Andr ew, the results of which are either a
chance towards healing, or to further dissociation, a mere repetition.
From the beginning of the novel, we are following the story of Teddy Daniels and his
partner Chuck Aule (actually a doctor), two US marshals who h ave come to the Shutter
Island‟s famous Ash ecliff hospital to investigate the case of a missing patient Rachel solando
which was all, in fact, a part of Andrews delusion. Since Andrew had chained his original
identity to the deepest corners of his unconscious, he had to create his new identity in al l the
complexity and originality associated with a normal human life. So he started believing that
he was in the hospital not because he was an insane murderer, but because he was asked to go
to the island as a part of his job. Here, Andrew, a clear victim of Psychosis, starts creating
lies, elaborate and subtle, embellishing them with details so much that the tale slowly
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 258 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
becomes quite fantastical. The only apparent break to this delusional thread was his frequent
dreams and hallucinations.
In his work, Interpretation of Dreams , Freud discusses how dreams are windows to
our unconscious; whatever our unconscious hides might arise as different symbols and
images through our dreams. In his delusional self, Teddy had created his own version of his
wife‟s death, set to fire by Andrew Laeddis, but in his dreams, she always appeared dripping
wet. The account of his worst dream is given in chapter twelve of the novel, a dream where
Dr. Crawley, the head doctor at Ashecliff, Chuck, Rachel, Andrew, Teddy, his dead kid s, and
his wife were all present. In the dream, the kids are begging Teddy to be saved from their
mother, Rachel, and Rachel is in turn promising Teddy that she would be a wife to him
forever only if he helped her in killing their children. But here in the dream too, Dr. Crawley
is trying to reason with him, asking how he could love the woman who killed his children.
The conversations repeat again and again in the dream, and Teddy‟s choices are always the
same, helping his wife. “And Teddy kept waving, even though the girl wouldn‟t wave back as
her mother carried her towards the mausoleum and the little girl stared at Teddy, her eyes
beyond hope f or rescue, resigned to this world, this sacrifice” (188).
The dream portrays the inner battle perfectly. It is no t only about the grief tormenting
his existence day by day, but also about the deeply rooted shame he felt in being a
participant, through ignorance and inaction, in his wife‟s actions. In the dream, he is never
able to save his children because of his ove rwhelming desire to have Rachel as his wife. This
shows his immense love for Dolores, the ultimate symbol of his repression. Even in the
dream his superego talks to him through Dr. Crawley, reasoning and persuading him. Reham
Al Taher explains in her resea rch, “As Freud believed we are essentially every character in
our dreams, his dead wife and children may be an extended representation of himself that has
crippled him with guilt and he tries to drown his children deeper into his unconscious to
avoid attac hing himself to the crime” (“Shutter Island: A Psychoanalytic Perspective”).
According to his delusional self, he is in Shutter Island for two purposes, to find the
missing patient Rachel Solando, accused of killing her children, and to find the pyromania c,
Andrew Laeddis, the one who killed his wife. These characters were a distortion of his truth.
His real investigation then is to find himself and his wife, that is his repressed memories. The
name Rachel Solando itself is an anagram of Dolores Chanal and the name Edward Daniels
(Teddy), an anagram of Andrew Laeddis. Apart from this, Edward, Daniel, and Rachel are
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 259 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
also the names of his dead children. This is how the repressed contents are subtly manifested
in the novel.
Dr. Crawley and Dr. Sheehan soon re alize that the only way to cure Andrew was to let
him be Teddy and find Laeddis, so they play along with him in his delusions. As the
instances of the resurfacing of repressed memories started increasing Teddy further invents
stories about how the hospital was conducting illegal lobotomies on healthy people like
himself. Finally in the last scene at the lighthouse, the symbol of an integrated (healed) mind,
Teddy is made to accept who he is. Andrew is made to face his truth and the two broken
selves are int egrated. He was given the chance to live either as a cured man with a guilty
heart or to pretend to live in the illusory space that he created and face lobotomy. But the
former option required courage that was beyond Andrew‟s power, and so he chose s the
second one, the one where he could have an untarnished self that was appealing to the
standards of his superego. The last sentence from the movie adaptation of the same story
gives a clearer idea about Andrew‟s final choice. “Which would be worse, to live as a
monster or to die as a good man?” (Scorcese)(Shutter Island). He chose to live in his
delusions even if he knew that it only meant an early death.
Conclusion:
Following the above discussions and arguments, it can be said that Dennis Lehane‟s
Shutter Island is a perfect site for psychological exploration. The novel deals with mental
trauma leading to repression triggered by guilt. Andrew was already mentally unstable by the
time of his wife‟s death; this would naturally mean that his ability to decide between right
and wrong is already weakened. The story is a gradual development towards the superego‟s
final victory. The battle was started by the Id‟s action, but after being tormented by the
punishment of guilt, the ego finally succumbs to fulfilling t he ego ideal, erasing the thin line
between normal defenses and psychotic tendencies.
www.TLHjournal. com Literary Herald ISSN: 2454 -3365
An International Refereed /Peer -reviewed English e -Journal
Impact Factor: 6.292 (SJIF)
Vol. 8, Issue 1 (June 2022 )
Page 260 Dr. Siddhartha Sharma
Editor -in-Chief
References
Flaherty, John. Guilt Unplugged; Waking Up From The Lie We Live . 1st., CreateSpace
Independent Publishing, 2017.
Freud, Anna. The Ego and The Mechanisms of Defense ., International Universities Press.,
1946.
Freud, Sigmund . New Introduct ory Lectures on Psychoanalysis ., Hogart Press, 1933.
Freud, Sigmund. The Ego and The Id ., Norton and Company. Inc, 1962.
Freud, Sigmund. Civiliz ations and its Discontents , edited by James Strachey.W.W Norton,
1989.
Hurlock, Elizabeth. Personality and Development. US: McGraw -Hill, 1974.
Kernberg, Otto F . Borderline Conditions and Pathological Narcissism . J. Aronson, 1985.
Lear, Jonathan. Freud. Routledge, 2015.
Lehane, Dennis. Shutter Island . Ist ed., Harper Collins, 2003.
“PTSD and Problems with Alcohol Use.” National Cneter for PTSD .
https://www.ptsd.va.gov/understand/related/problem_alcohol_use.asp
“Repression: Concepts, Kinds and Advantages.” Psychologydiscussion.net ,
https://www.psychologydiscussion.net/human -psychology/repression -concept -kinds -
and-advantages -psychology/2214
Rosenthal, Howard. Human Services Dictionary . Routledge, 2003.
Schreiner, Michael. “Id Versus Suoer Ego”. Evolution Councelling .
https://evolutioncounseling.com/id -versus -super -ego/
Singer, Jerome, Repression and Dissociation: Implications for Personality Theory,
Psychopathology and Health . The University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Taher, Reham Al. “Shutter Island Case Study: A Psychoanalytic and Behaviotistic
Perspective.” CourseHero . https://www.coursehero.com/file/87568331/Abnormal -
Psychology -in-Shutter -Island -Revision -threedoc/
