Silence_of_Lambs_Academic
In repo

Univ ersity of Montana Univ ersity of Montana
ScholarW orks at Univ ersity of Montana ScholarW orks at Univ ersity of Montana
Graduate Student Theses, Disser tations, &
Professional P apers Graduate School
1996
Cultur al analysis of Jonathan Demme 's "The Silence of the Cultur al analysis of Jonathan Demme 's "The Silence of the
Lambs" Lambs"
Arthur S. Almquist
The Univ ersity of Montana
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /scholar works.umt.edu/etd
Let us know how access t o this document benefits y ou.
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Almquist, Ar thur S., "Cultur al analysis of Jonathan Demme 's "The Silence of the Lambs" " (1996). Graduate
Student Theses, Disser tations, & Pr ofessional P apers . 1952.
https:/ /scholar works.umt.edu/etd/1952
This Thesis is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the Gr aduate School at ScholarW orks at Univ ersity of
Montana. It has been accepted for inclusion in Gr aduate Student Theses, Disser tations, & Pr ofessional P apers b y an
authoriz ed administr ator of ScholarW orks at Univ ersity of Montana. F or mor e information, please contact
scholar works@mso.umt.edu .
Maureen and Mike " -
MANSFIELD LIBRARY ' -
The University of MONTANA
Pennission is granted by the author to reproduce tliis material in its entirety,
provided that this material is used for scholarly purposes and is properly cited in
published works and reports.
** Please check "Yes" or "No" and provide signature
Yes, I grant permission
No, I do not grant permission **
Author's Signature
Date ^
Any copying for commercial purposes or financial gain may be undertaken only with
tlie author's explicit consent.
A CULTURAL ANALYSIS OF
JONATHAN DEMME'S
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS
Arthur S. Almquist
presented in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
Master of Arts
The University of Montana
1996
Approved by:
Chairperson
Dean, Graduate School
Date
UMI Number; EP35166
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
UMT OisMTtation PlMiaMng
UMI EP35166
Published by ProQuest LLC (2012). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
uesf
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106- 1346
To Amy
with thanks to
Randy Bolton
Dora Lanier
Michael Murphy
James Kriley
introduction
Mary told me that she tends to have a hard time
with films that contain violence against women; I nodded,
looked to Scott for support, and thought fast.
The three of us were teaching at a private boarding
school in Connecticut during the spring of 1991, and had
decided that a Friday evening at the movies would offer an
escape from our daily adolescent-controlled chores. It
was the nationwide opening night of Jonathan Demme's The
Silence of the Lambs, and, as a long-time admirer of
Demme's work, I was desperate to see it. While Scott was
basically indifferent, Mary said that she was hesitant
about viewing Silence because she did not know what to
expect from the picture; if it were extremely graphic
and/or disturbing, she knew that she would have a
difficult time sitting through it.
Knowing precious little about the film's narrative
but aware that it did deal with a serial murderer of
women, I pointed out and stressed the fact that the film
was receiving excellent reviews and boasted two superb
actors (Jodie Foster and Anthony Hopkins) in the leads. I
told her that Jonathan Demme, of Stop Making Sense,
Married to the Mob, and Melvin and Howard -- all of them
films based in strong characters and personalities, each
possessing a bittersweet take on our culture — had
directed the film. I explained that while Demme's career
in film did begin under the wing of Roger Gorman
(notorious in Hollywood for producing and directing films
cheaply and quickly, with wildly variant results), Demme's
films have consistently risen above the more profit-minded
projects which seem to regularly emerge at our theatres.
Always intelligent and character-driven, his work
emphasizes story over more "obvious" audience-friendly
techniques. Silence could not then, I promised, be
without a high level of integrity. Mary finally agreed to
give the picture a chance, and I said a silent prayer that
I was not about to lead her into a nightmare at the
Torrington Cineplex.
Three-quarters of the way into the story, the
serial killer nicknamed "Buffalo Bill" is taunting a young
woman he has imprisoned in his basement well; she screams
in terror, reacting to human blood and fingernails she
has discovered embedded in the surrounding walls. He
begins to scream himself, mocking her cries, pulling at
his T-shirt to mimic breasts. Mary calmly got up,
shuffled through the crowded aisle, and walked to the
popcorn stand to catch her breath. "What movie are you
seeing?" asked the young African-American hostess.
"The Silence of the Lambs," Mary replied.
The young woman nodded. "What scene they on?"
"She's screaming in the well," Mary said, "and he's
imitating her."
The girl shook her head grimly. "Oh, honey," she
said, "it just gets worse. "
* * *
It does get worse. The Silence of the Lambs is
arguably one of the most effective and terrifying American
films ever made, gradually tightening its grip on its
audience as it builds to its heroine's final descent into
a living hell. By the film's conclusion, we may forget
that we have seen very little actual violence on-screen;
rather, the ideas and results of violence are emphasized,
forcing the film's harrowing and somewhat repellent
subject matter deep into our souls. It is not a film to
be easily dismissed or forgotten.
"Worse" in terms of its unnerving and chilling
material, yes. Yet, this is also one of the most literate
and intelligent films of the decade -- and, surprisingly,
one of the most auspicious. Peter Travers wrote in
Rolling Stone that "for all the unbridled savagery on
display, what is shrewd, significant, and finally hopeful
about Silence of the Lambs is the way it proves a movie
can be mercilessly scary and mercifully humane at the same
time."^ A careful analysis finds that the film
challenges our assumptions about human beings and their
labels, wbile considering and understanding our own human
search for meaning. As the narrative unfolds. The Silence
of the Lambs goes far beyond any ambitions of a simple
"scare film." It is prolific with cultural perception and
cognizance, tendering, for those willing to take the
journey, profound insights into our very culture', insights
which literally can help us to make sense and meaning out
of our own lives within it.
In the six years since its release, I have often
defended Silence as more than a horror film, and, in
1993, wrote an in-depth commentary for a Performance
Theory course on the ways in which the film transcends its
"genre." I discussed the film as literature, focusing on
the film's strong characterizations and subtle handling of
violence; Demme's Hitchcockian understanding of suspense;
and, finally, the way that Ms. Foster's Clarice Starling
develops in the course of the picture. I had, it happens,
only scratched the surface.
The film does have many enemies. Upon its release,
it ignited a fire of protest from many who challenged the
script's treatment of women, and, especially, Demme's
depiction of homosexuals. In 1991, Lisa Kennedy of The
Village Voice invited a number of writers, many of them
film critics both gay and straight, to comment on the
furor surrounding Silence. Among their reactions:
The Silence of the Lambs is a dumb, stupid,
manipulative, gripping, well-made, and ultimately
unbelievable movie. It is not scary, it is just
unpleasant.
Larry Kramer
The director chose to make the symptoms [of Buffalo
Bill's homosexuality] obvious through what the
general audience accepts as typical gay male
affect: nipple rings, swishing scarves, crude
makeup, etc...it's clear that gay men are not a
community Demme considers worth handling with
care.
Jewelle Gomez
Jame Gumb [is] more a projection of homophobia
than a credible character.
Martha Gever
. . .when we actually see Gximb in his natural
habitat, he's endowed with all the fag cliches
homophobes have doted on for decades: bleached
locks, whiny voice, frilly glad rags, and, choicest
of all, the love of a teensy white poodle named
Precious.^
Stephen Harvey
The above critics have allowed the depiction of a
character -- a character stressed in the script as not a
homosexual, but rather in search of some sort of identity
— to blind them to the sagaciousness of Demme's film. I
believe that the film does transcend its genre. But it
also is extraordinarily erudite. My cultural analysis of
the film, responding to the concepts of cultural
interpretation developed by Victor Turner, Jerome Bruner,
Clifford Geertz, Arnold van Gennep, and Mircea Eliade,
finds that The Silence of the Lambs is a magnificent work,
bridging rites of passage, transformation, and the
ascension of the spirit into a modern work of art. This
cultural analysis will eventually help make meaning of the
film, as well as elucidate its insights into our own
culture.
We in America live and function within a culture of
contradiction and paradox: our children, for example, can
become anything they want to become, so long as the
judging majority does not view their choice as deviant or
in bad taste; we pay lip service to denouncing censorship
and maintaining that America is the "Land of the Free" ...
provided that, as evidenced by the recent Tele­
communications Act, we do not behave "offensively" or say
things which are "annoying" on the Internet; and many
state leaders still demonstrate their abhorrence of murder
and murderers by choosing simply to murder the accused.
Mind you, I am not suggesting in these observations that
there could ever exist a culture devoid of entanglements
and impasses; the very presence of human beings ensures
cultural predicaments. It seems, however, that many
paradoxical dilemmas within our culture are uniquely
American- The Silence of the Lambs, then, with all of its
serial murderers, skinnings, beheadings, transsexualism,
and torture both mental and physical, indicts our culture
as being cornered by societal incongruity and dilemmas of
its own making.
And finally, a cultural analysis of The Silence of
the Lambs — like all consequential works of art -- can
help us to find and create greater meaning within our own
lives. Kenneth Burke indicated in 1941 that works of art.
like proverbs, do actually offer strategies for dealing
with the events of our lives:
[They should be seen] as strategies for selecting
enemies and allies, for socializing losses, for
warding off [the] evil eye, for purification,
propitiation, and desanctification, consolation and
vengeance, admonition and exhortation, implicit
commands or instructions of one sort or another.^
As a work of art. The Silence of the Lambs is more
than a relentlessly frightening film.
Burke's words, "equipment for living^'
reckoned with as such. It is truly, in
— and must be
Chapter One:
On Culture and Rites of Passage
"...to understand man you must understand how his experiences
and his acts are shaped by his intentional states...the form
of these intentional states is realized only through participation
in the symbolic systems of the culture."
Jerome Bruner, Acts of Meaning
Everything about The Silence of the Lambs — its
heart, characters, themes, and dialogue -- could take
place in no other country than America, and at no other
time than this "family values"-conscious decade. Seeing
ourselves as "The Land of the Free," along with the
heightened perceptions of the rest of the world, has set
us up to be in highly ironic place: while we believe that
America is organized around a clear set of ideologies and
symbols -- with freedom, the family, and opportunity at
its center -- the realities faced by many Americans are
not so consistent. Each detail in The Silence of the
Lambs, from the pathology of Buffalo Bill to the
intricacies of standard FBI procedure, derives from,
reacts to, or is fed by the American culture of which it
is a part. The film also deals explicitly with the notion
of cultural and spiritual transition, particularly with
what van Gennep refers to as Rites of Passage.
But what do we really mean when we discuss culture?
The very word seems today to be taking on an elitist air:
the word can conjure images for many of tuxedos and
martinis, surrounded by discussion of the latest cultural
event. Obviously, this is not the way of our thinking.
To explore this notion of culture, I shall begin by
pointing to anthropologist Clifford Geertz's analogy of
man as a being constantly suspended in self-spun "webs" of
significance. "I take culture," he writes, "to be those
webs, and the analysis of it to be therefore not an
experimental science in search of law but an interpretive
one in search of meaning."^ If, indeed, we "spin" these
webs ourselves, then one might initially perceive Geertz's
version of culture as being highly individualized; that
is, a reaction to whatever outside forces come up against
our own webs. Geertz, in fact, is diametrically opposed
to this notion:
Culture is most effectively treated..-purely as a
symbolic system (the catch phrase is, "in its own
terms"), by isolating its elements, specifying the
internal relationships among those elements, and
then characterizing the whole system in some
general way -- according to the core symbols
around which it is organized, the underlying
structures of which it is a surface expression, or
the ideological principles upon which it is based
(italics mine)
Culture is finally public, Geertz says, because meaning is
public.
Like Geertz, Jerome Bruner also does not accept the
conception of culture as monastic. In Acts of Meaning,
the psychologist and professor coins the term "folk
psychology," arguing that culture literally shapes our
lives and minds, giving meaning to action "by underlying
its intentional states in an interpretive system."^ Folk
Psychology, for Bruner, is a system by which human beings
organize their experience with the social world. People
hold beliefs and desires: we believe in the organization
of the world, we desire certain things within that world
— and, moreover, we believe that all of our beliefs
should somehow coalsscB and that others should not want
things which seem to be irreconcilable. The very nature
of Folk Psychology for Bruner is canonical: it "summarizes
not simply how things are but (often implicitly) how they
should be."^ Naturally, the events of our lives rarely
go gently down that path; as a means of coping, then,
Bruner states that Folk Psychology has at its heart the
notion of narrative.
Folk Psychology, invested in canonicality, empowers
the "normal" with authority and legitimacy- But, Bruner
states, the capability of a culture to survive lies not in
simple harmony; instead, it "inheres in its capacity for
resolving conflicts, for explicating differences and
renegotiating communal meanings."® Here we begin to see
how a "horror" film as "disturbing" as The Silence of the
Lambs can be as rich in meaning and cultural relevance (if
not more so) as a more obvious audience-pleaser like Terms
of Endearment. Without chaos, Bruner says, there is no
order; so, when the norms are shattered or left behind, we
must possess a method of interpreting these departures and
making meaning of them within our culture, or interpreting
and making new meaning of them...to make proverbial sense
out of chaos. It is narrative -- the story -- and the
narrative structure which, he asserts, helps us to achieve
this level of meaning.
We learn in early courses on creative writing that
at the heart of every story is conflict: Man versus Man,
Man versus Self, Man versus Society, and so forth.
Conflict arises when there is a sense of disharmony, or an
exception to the ordinary or the expected. Narrative,
then, specializes in bridging the gaps between the
ordinary and the extraordinary. Bruner sets forth two
important properties of the narrative in this form:
1.) The narrative is inherently sequential. The
events within a narrative do not generally have
life or meaning on their own; it is only when they
are ordered — three follows two follows one and so
on -- that the overall sequence forms a collective
meaning.
2.) Narrative can be "real" or "imaginary" without
loss of its strength as a story. The sequence of
its ideas -- not the ideas themselves -- determine
the plot.^
When "juicy gossip" travels through our social circles,
for example, details will usually change, grow more
"interesting," or even disappear. But the story remains a
story, and one which bears repeating again and again,
regardless of the "truth" of the individual details.
Just as every story has its own narrative voice
(making it "somebody's" story), human beings also have
their own individual prisms through which they see and
filter the events of their lives. As a prism processes
light, it follows that there must be a way for people to
process their "life information." Consider as a solution,
then, how many times daily we tell stories: be they as
simple as recounting a miserable shift at work or as
complex as dealing with the last moments before a spouse's
permanent departure, we sequence the events w ith varying
specificity of detail into a literal, comprehensible
narrative. The telling of the story helps to create
meaning for ourselves, and others, within our culture.
Victor Turner and Arnold van Gennep, in their
respective works From Ritual to Theatre and Rites of
Passage, offer crucial theories for our analysis regarding
culture, and focus on this notion of rites of passage. In
order that we will be able to make meaning of the film's
story and events in relation to our own lives, I should
like to briefly outline these ideas now so that we are
fully armed as we move into a discussion of the film.
In Rites of Passage, van Gennep states early on
that his objective in the text is to assemble all of the
"ceremonial patterns which accompany a passage from one
situation to another or from one cosmic or social world to
another.The term "ceremonial" should not, however,
limit our application of his work to ideas to which we in
1996 America cannot relate, such as the small-scale
societies on which he began his studies. In fact. Turner
states as one of his objectives in From Ritual to Theatre
to "revert to van Gennep's earlier usage in regarding
almost all types of rites as having the processual form of
' passageBut what is meant by the term "passage?"
Van Gennep divides the concept into three distinct
phases: rites of separation, transition rites, and rites
of incorporation. In separation, sacred time and space
are distinguished from profane or temporal space and time.
The quality of time. Turner asserts, must be changed —
that is, "beyond or outside the time which measures
secular processes and routines.An absolutely
separate and unique world is created for the candidates,
while the ritual subjects are detached from their previous
social statuses to be placed into that world, with no
contact from anyone or anything on the "outside." During
the intervening transition, or "limen" ("threshold" in
Latin) phase, the subjects find themselves moving through
a time and space of limbo and ambiguity. "Whoever passes
from one time to the other," van Gennep writes, "finds
himself physically and magico-religiously...[waveringJ
between two worlds.This phase can be looked at as a
"preparation for union, a literal crossing of the
spiritual threshold. Finally, after undergoing the
mystifying betwixt and between quality of transition,
symbolic actions and phenomena representing the return of
the "initiands" to their "new, relatively stable, well-
defined position in the total society"are experienced;
this is the phase known as incorporation. And there at
the center of the entire transformative process lies a
critical distinction of space, time, and action: the
sacred as opposed to the profane.
Mircea Eliade, in 1957, examined the very nature of
religion, passage, and myth in The Sacred and the Profane.
I hesitate to use the word "examined" here, because it may
make the process sound purely academic — when in fact it
was and is anything but. In the introduction to his text,
Eliade cites Rudolf Otto's 1917 Das Heilige (The Sacred)
as ground-breaking in the way that it avoided studying the
ideas of God, focusing instead on "the modalities of the
religious experienceOtto set himself, Eliade
writes, to characterize the component parts of this
experience:
He finds the feeling of terror before the sacred,
before the awe-inspiring mystery, the majesty that
emanates an overwhelming superiority of power; he
finds religious fear before the fascinating mystery
in which per fect fullness of being flowers...[these
experiences] are induced by the revelation of an
aspect of divine power.
The sacred is the opposite of the profane, Eliade writes,
proposing the term hierophany to characterize "the
manifestation of something of a wholly different order, a
reality that does not belong to our world, in objects that
are an integral part of our natural 'profane' world.
As the entire story of The Silence of the Lambs
hinges upon one character's desperate and murderous
attempt to transform himself, it is important to here note
the duality which must accompany hierophany. When an
object or event manifests itself as sacred, it indeed does
become something else, but it also remains itself. "A
sacred stone remains a stone," Eliade writes; "apparently
(or, more precisely, from the profane point of view),
nothing distinguishes it from all other stones.But
if that stone did emerge as sacred for one person, its
earthly, profane reality is metamorphosed into a divine
reality, while at the same time remaining in its original
form. All of nature is capable of revealing itself as
sacrality, then: "The cosmos in its entirety can become a
hierophany-"20
Eliade does not limit his exposition to any one
culture, faith, or even religion; rather, he states as his
goal the presentation of the precise dimensions of the
religious experience, differentiating the religious from
the profane experience of the world. The sacred and the
profane are two modes of being, and to a degree are
dependent on each other: for the religious man, Eliade
writes, space is not homogeneous. Some parts of space for
him are qualitatively separate from others, and there
continually will surface breaks and interruptions in his
space. These breaks, then, reveal the opposition between
space which is sacred and that which is profane. Eliade
calls this break primordial:
For it is the break effected in space that allows
the world to be constituted, because it reveals the
fixed point, the central axis for all future
orientation. When the sacred manifests itself in
any hierophany, there is not only a break in the
homogeneity of space; there is also revelation of
an absolute reality, opposed to the nonreality of
the vast surrounding expanse.
Experience within the profane space is static and neutral;
there is no break to differentiate the qualities of its
mass, and hence no point of reference. The discovery of
the sacred for the religious man, then, offers a center
and a literal way for him to open communication between
the cosmic planes and somehow begin to make connections
within it all: "the experience of sacred space makes
possible the 'founding of the world': where the sacred
manifests itself in space, the rest unveils itself, the
world comes into existence22
In his exploration of space, Eliade points to the
symbolic "opening above" which all forms of cosmos (house,
temple, universe, body) possess. As we apply these
concepts to the film, we should note the significance of
this symbolism in relation to the work of van Gennep and
Turner. This "opening," for Eliade, connects to the
action of passage from one mode of being to another. From
his beginnings, Man is predestined to passage on a large
scale: he passes from pre-life to life to death to, for
the religious man, new existence after death. With this,
Eliade helps us to deduce a particular conceptualization
of human existence:
when brought to birth, man is not yet completed;
he must be born a second time, spiritually; he
becomes complete man by passing from an imperfect,
embryonic state to a perfect, adult state. In a
word, it may be said that human existence attains
completion through a series of "passage rites," in
short, by successive initiations.^3
This higher opening represents a desire to reach for the
ascending direction of heaven, for transcendence. Passage
is, Eliade stresses, treacherous: he cites cultural images
of crossing a perilous bridge or opening a narrow gate
(which, he says, occur frequently in initiatory and
funerary rituals and mythologies), suggesting a precarious
journey founded on the ascension of the spirit.
With these notions of the sacred and profane,
transition, and transcendence in mind, let us now turn our
attention to the perilous passages of our narrative:
journeys enveloped by the crossing of bridges; a rite of
passage within a well; being led down an aphotic path by a
menacing and decidedly anti-heroic conductor; and,
ultimately, a harrowing confrontation in a modern version
of the abyss.
Chapter Two:
The Portrayal and Pursuit of Buffalo Bill
"Our Billy wasn't born a criminal; he was made one
through years of systematic abuse."
Hannibal Lecter
"Everywhere around the world.
They're coming to America today."
Neil Diamond
We meet him first as an enigma: "Buffalo Bill," a
serial killer who has been successfully eluding police and
the FBI in the kidnapping, murder, and partial skinning of
five women, all under thirty, all relatively large. As
the film progresses, we do learn more about him: he stalks
during late hours, using night-vision glasses for sight
and power; he relies on the kindness of his victims to
lure them into his van by pretending to need help; his
real name is Jame Gumb. By the film's conclusion,
however, our information on this man still remains less
than complete: we know that he was abused as a child, and
thinks that he is now a transsexual; having been rejected
for transsexual surgery, he has decided to create a female
suit for himself using the skin and hair of real women.
We are not given concrete details about his history, nor
do we really know what his sexual orientation is.
This character has created a number of problems for
many viewers of the film. Significant numbers of
homosexuals (most of them male) decried the entire
project, calling it a vicious attack on the gay community.
Jame Gumb, as played by Ted Levine, was seen as a
stereotype of paranoid homophobia: swishy, limp-wristed,
and fey. draped in scarves and dancing effeminately before
a video camera. It is ironic that Jonathan Demme (who
went on to direct Philadelphia, the first major studio-
produced American film to deal with a homosexual couple
and with AIDS), stated in an interview Just prior to the
film's release that "it was tremendously important to not
have Gumb misinterpreted by the audience as homosexual.
That would be a complete betrayal of the themes of the
movie, and a disservice to gay people."24 Unfortunately,
Demme's best intentions could not calm the rising storm
which followed the film in its national release, leaving
one to wonder what it would have taken to appease the
offended viewer.
Demme's attempt to clarify Gumb's dilemma within
the film begins with Ted Tally's screenplay. In one of
Hannibal Lecter's (played by Anthony Hopkins) early
interviews with Clarice Starling (played by Jodie Foster),
he states that Gumb "hates his own identity, you see, and
thinks that that makes him a transsexual... but his
pathology is a thousand times more savage, and more
terrifying."25 This seems a satisfactory explanation,
but the issue is confused by Starling's discovery of
Benjamin Raspail's head, sealed in a jar, in Lecter's
storage unit. Raspail, Lecter states, was "a garden
25 The Silence of the Lamhs, dir. Jonathan Denune, with Jodie Foster,
Anthony Hopkins, and Scott Glenn. Orion, 1990. All remaining
quotations from the film are from this source.
variety manic depressive" who, as Gumb's lover, confessed
fear to Lecter days before becoming Gumb's victim. As
Gumb's relationship with Raspail is the only homosexual
"encounter" we hear about in the film, the film seems to
ask if having homosexual experiences makes one a
homosexual. As if to answer its own question, the film
then presents Gumb as being more a man who, loathing
himself, searches for any kind of identity to grasp on to,
resorting to the extreme as a solution. "At the very
least," writes Julie Tharp, "[Giamb's] character exploits
contemporary anxiety over gender and sexuality. His
confusion and dissatisfaction with his own nature are
expressed, as most dilemmas seem to be in America, in
violent terms."^6
Hostility about the film's supposed anti-gay
undercurrent also indicates that these critics have missed
a crucial point in the narrative. Lecter states that Gumb
was not born a criminal; "he was made one through years of
systemic abuse." (Although we do not learn in the film
what sort of abuse this was, the word "abuse" alone is
enough for us in 1996 America to draw substantial
conclusions.) Gumb was beaten down, then, before he even
had a chance. But remember what culture he lives in, and
ask yourself: what do we tell our children as they grow
up, and our citizens in struggle? Be what you can he.
Make something of yourself. We pride ourselves on telling
our citizens -- and the rest of the world -- that in
America, if you work hard enough, you can become anything
you want to become. This is the land of opportunity and
the land of achievable dreams. Of course, we all go
through flashes of cynicism about this rhetoric, but who
among us does not feel a misty sense of pride occasionally
when hearing "The Star-Spangled Banner"? The huge success
of Lee Greenwood's anthem "Proud to be an American" during
the Gulf War makes very clear that we are a nation
fiercely proud of our freedom and all that it represents.
Gumb hates his identity and wants change. We learn
that, in an attempt to go through the proper channels, he
applied for transsexual surgery at Johns/Hopkins, the
University of Minnesota, and Columbus Medical Center.
Lecter explains to Starling that "severe psychological
trauma" in Gumb led to the subsequent rejection from each
institution, which makes perfect and logical sense to us
-- but to the already disturbed Giamb, his dream has been
shattered by the very country which promised him a chance
for change. We can then conclude that it is this denial,
not a hatred of women and not homosexuality, which was the
dominating factor in Gumb's murderous psychosis. In
attempting to work within some of the key symbol systems
of America (medicine, health care, assistance for all who
need it), Gumb, in his mind, operated by the rules -- and
was pushed away. Turner notes in From Ritual to Theatre
that when implicit rules begin to surface within a culture
which hinder the "possible combination of factors to
certain conventional patterns, designs, or configurations"
(in this case, many Americans still believe that anything
which strays from straight heterosexuality is literally a
sickness), then
...we are seeing the intrusion of normative social
structure into what is potentially and in principle
a free and experimental region of culture, a region
where not only new elements but also new
combinatory rules may be introduced -- far more
readily than in the case of language.^7
Whatever reasons existed for Gumb's denial are irrelevant
to him and to our discussion; the very fact that he was
shunned while trying to work within the rules and symbol
systems of America itself is what matters.
Bruner tells of a fascinating connection made in
1986 through scientific journals. He begins by quoting an
article written by Hazel Markas and Paula Nurius for
American Psychologist, in which they write on the notion
of American self: "Possible selves represent individuals'
ideas of what they might become, what they would like to
become, and what they are afraid of becoming." The ideal
of the American self, Bruner notes, highlights the degree
to which we place value on not closing any proverbial
doors. "Contemporaneously." he continues, "there began a
trickle of clinical papers on the alarming rise of
Multiple Personality Disorders as a primarily American
pathology."28 Demme, known and respected for his keen
eye for detail, places images of America and Americana
consistently throughout the film: a flag adorns a coffin
in Lecter's storage space, and, near the film's
conclusion, a cake decorated with the FBI symbol and logo
is cut into right at the word "Justice." Giimb' s lair
contains an American flag serving as a wallhanging; a
World War II helmet on a windowsill, which catches the
sunlight through shattered glass as Gumb is fatally shot;
and, as Starling is stalked through Gumb's basement, the
camera finds a small sign depicting the face of a
blindfolded man above the insignia "AMERICA: OPEN YOUR
EYES." "Be what you want to be" is not only deceptive;
Demme reminds us that it clearly has the potential to be
destructive.
In response to all that has occurred in his life,
Jame Gumb has created his own symbol system: it has its
own logic, its own set of meanings, and, Demme says, its
own "motivation."29 to recognize a figure such as Gumb,
then, one must attempt to embrace the individual system.
The comprehension of any symbol system, Geertz asserts,
does not rest on gathering factoids in a foreign land and
bringing them home for study; rather, it depends upon
the degree to which [the anthropologist] is able t o
clarify what goes on (my italics) in such places,
to reduce the puzzlement -- what manner of men are
these? -- to which unfamiliar acts emerging out of
unknown backgrounds naturally give rise.^^
Here we see that Thomas Harris, the novelist on whose work
both The Silence of the Lambs and Michael Mann's 1986 film
Manhunter are based, treats his thrillers, if you will,
anthropologically. In both stories, the serial killers
have their own unique symbol systems; likewise, all
attempts to catch them are foiled until one character
tries to look beyond the outside facts and deep into the
"unfamiliar acts emerging out of unknovm backgrounds."
In Silence, all but one of the FBI's agents —
males, all of them -- see Gumb as a force of pure evil who
kills and mutilates women; never do they attempt to
analyze why Gumb does what he does. Starling, through her
interviews with Lecter, is the only agent who does; and
she, the script reminds us, is an FBI trainee. Consider
this dialogue near the end of the film, when Starling
recognizes the motive behind Gumb's actions and attempts
to alert Crawford by phone:
starling.
He's making himself a woman's suit, Mr. Crawford,
out of real women. And he can sew, this guy, he's
very skilled. He's a tailor, or a dressmaker --
Crawford..
Starling --
starling.
That's why they're all so big, he has to keep them
alive so he can starve them awhile, so he can --
Crawford.
Starling --
starling.
-- loosen their skin --
Crawford.
Starling, Starling, Starling! We know who he is,
and where he is. We're on our way there right now.
Crawford does not seem interested: after all, he knows the
killer's identity and is certain that he knows where Gumb
is. What else could matter? What is crucial to take
note of here is that although Starling and the FBI have
deduced Gumb's identity at the same time, it is Starling
-- the "anthropologist" -- who pieces together the reasons
behind his actions. But, as we soon learn, identity alone
is not nearly enough. When Starling offers to drive to
Illinois to meet them, Crawford asks her to stay in Ohio
and research more information on one of the murdered girls
and her connection to Gumb. "We want him for murder," he
tells her, "not kidnapping." While this research seems a
sort of busywork presented by Crawford while he gets to
the real business at hand, it is through this dialogue
with citizens of Belvedere that Starling ends up in Gumb's
asylum. And although this exploration of Belvedere is
obviously not nearly as extensive as the weeks, months, or
years an anthropologist would spend in a village, the
intention and process is the same. "Anthropologists don't
study villages," says Geertz; "they study in villages.
Demme juxtaposes the discovery of Gumb's sanctum
masterfully, luring us, like Crawford, into a false sense
of unearned confidence. We see the FBI agents ring the
doorbell of the the supposed house. The camera then cuts
to an interior shot of an elaborate bell structure
jangling within Gumb's basement, and Gumb's reaction to
it. The doorbell again is rung, and again we see the bell
within sounding the alarm. These back-and-forth shots
continue until Gumb finally opens the door, and the
camera, in a shot over Gumb's shoulder, discovers not the
expected FBI agents -- but Starling. Demme then quickly
cuts back to Illinois to find an agent telling Crawford
that the house is empty. Most of us are taken in by this
narrative surprise: having given up on the anthropological
details and trusted the exterior facts, we believed, like
Crawford, that knowing the killer's identity would
suffice. We then understand his horror as the camera
finds his eyes widening as he says one word: "Starling."
Let us look again at the interviews between
Starling and Lecter, for it is here that Starling begins
her anthropological pursuit. In their last conference, he
reminds her that she needs to think more simply: "Of each
particular thing, ask 'what is it in itself? What is its
nature? What does he do, this man you seek?" He kills
women, she says, to which Lecter vehemently responds: "No.
That is incidental. What is the first and principle thing
he does? What needs does he serve by killing?" Again,
Geertz writes that the entire point of a semiotic approach
to culture is "to aid us in gaining access to the
conceptual world in which our subjects live so that we
can, in some extended sense of the term, converse with
them."32 By consistently allowing Lecter to help her
understand Gumb's system, she is then and only then able
to finally confront him, at the same moment that Jack
Crawford and the all-male FBI task force are breaking into
the wrong house in the wrong state.
There is no question that Jame Gxoinb is a horrifying
figure, and my intention here is not to portray him as the
victim in this story- Rather, I find the character -- and
Levine's extremely rich interpretation of him — to be
much more layered than many critics of the film bothered
to notice. Study his eyes as he hears Precious crying in
pain; watch as a flash of doubt moves quickly across his
face before he orders Catherine Martin to replace his
lotion. Demme reminds us that to call Gumb simply "mad"
is too easy; a cultural analysis finds that Gumb and all
of his unique symbol systems need to be processed and
understood before he can be contended with. Unlike the
villains and psychopaths which stalk the majority of so-
called "horror" pictures inhabiting our video stores,
Demme and Levine have taken the time to create a person
with a history and grounds for his descent. Clarice
Starling, the only character in the story willing to
literally spend time as an anthropologist, is finally the
only one able to truly confront him and save the life of
Catherine Martin...and put her own demons, at least
temporarily, to rest.
Chapter Three:
And from Thence into Beauty
"...in sure and certain hope of the Resurrection
to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ;
who shall change our vile body,
that it may be like unto his glorious body."
Prayer Book, 1662
In Film Comment, Gavin Smith writes that Jonathan
Demme seems in his work to be consistently interested in
people who want to change, "who transform or experiment
with their identities, who want to become something
better."33 Indeed, Married to the Mob's Angela (played
by Michelle Pfieffer) tries desperately throughout the
story to create a new life outside of the mafia, and
begins her journey towards self-actualization in a hair
salon named "A Whole New You"; Something Wild's Lulu
(Melanie Griffith) takes a superficially conventional
businessman named Charlie (Jeff Daniels) on a life-
changing journey of sexuality, confrontation, and danger;
and, while Gray developed and performed the piece on stage
long before meeting Demme, Demme's filming of Spalding
Gray's Swimming to Cambodia, which focuses on one man's
experience while acting a small role in The Killing
Fields, becomes a literal Odyssey - The Silence of the
Lambs, however, is unigue. Transformation and
metamorphosis do not merely figure into the film; they are
its axis. Jeanne Silverthorne writes in Artforum that
Demme here describes "a society crying out for a
transformation of its basic structures as they are ordered
by gender, but harrowed by the process of change."^4
Jcune Gumb's desire for transformation initiates the story
of the film, to be followed by the forced, terrifying, and
resistant transformation of Catherine Martin; lastly, we
find the evolution which provides the film's centerpiece:
that of Clarice Starling.
We should look back to van Gennep and Turner as a
beginning for this discussion; specifically, to the notion
of transition, or limen. The passage from one social
status to another. Turner writes, is often accompanied by
a literal transition in space; that is, a geographical
movement from one space to another, such as the opening of
doors or "the literal crossing of a threshold which
separates two distinct areas, one associated with the
subject's pre-ritual or preliminal status, and the other
with his past-ritual or post-liminal status.The
liminal period, then, is indeed the threshold:
...it is the analysis of culture into factors and
their free or "ludic" recombination in any and
every possible pattern, however weird, that is of
the essence of liminality, liminality par
excellence.
Limen, no longer the positive past and not yet the hopeful
future, may appear to be negative in connotation. Turner
clarifies, however, that it contains both positive and
active qualities. "Especially," he says, "where that
'threshold' is protracted and becomes a 'tunnel'...this is
particularly the case in initiation rituals, with their
long periods of seclusion and training of novices rich in
the deployment of symbolic forms and esoteric
teachings. "3"^
In describing Jame Gixtnb' s murder of Benjamin
Raspail, Lecter calls the act "a fledgling killer's first
effort at tranformation." We have already established the
reasoning behind Giimb' s desire for change, but we have not
yet looked at his use of symbol in this process, nor have
we discussed his ritual and liminal period. Starling
discovers in the course of the story that Gumb imports and
raises Asian moths and butterflies, caring for them as if
they were family: "Somebody grew this guy. Fed him honey,
and nightshade, kept him warm... somebody loved him." He
then places the cocoon of one specific line -- the
Acherontia Styx moth, named for two rivers in hell --
into the throats of each of the women he has used. "The
significance of the moth is change," Lecter tells
Starling. "Caterpillar into chrysalis, or pupa, and from
thence into beauty-" Murder is incidental for Gumb; he
does not kill for the pleasure of killing, or for the
feeling of power, or for an immediate sexual charge. It
is the desire for transformation which drives him, and the
moth -- which, he describes, while gently stroking a
particularly large one, as "so powerful, so beautiful" --
is his symJbol of this metamorphosis.
Ritual, for Turner, is not in itself a grand
dualistic struggle in which order, cosmos and form
consistently triumph over chaos and the indeterminate.
Rather, it is "a transformative self-immolation of order
as presently constituted...or self-dismemberment of order,
in the subjective depths of liminality." Gumb, in the
meticulous fashioning of his precise and elaborate
"woman's suit," is literally trying to reconstruct his own
dismembered identity, for it is only through devastation
and reconstruction -- transformation -- that a genuine
"reordering" may come about.
In a film containing very little onscreen violence,
one of the most surprisingly uncomfortable scenes for the
audience to watch in the film -- particularly men -- is a
sequence in which Gumb prepares himself for an unclothed
ritualistic dance, to be captured by a video camera set
upon a tripod. Before we look closely at this scene,
however, a few additional words from Turner are vital in
order that we may understand the liminality which Gumb
believes he is creating for himself.
Ritual symbols [of the liminal phase], though some
represent inversion of normal reality,
characteristically fall into two types: those of
effacement and those of ambiguity or paradox.
Hence, in many societies...[the liminal initiands]
are... stripped of names and clothing, smeared with
the common earth rendered indistinguishable from
animals. They are associated with such general
oppositions as life and death, male and female...
since they are at once dying from or dead to their
former status and life, and being born and growing
into new ones.^^
We quickly realize as the scene opens that Gumb is
literally applying a sort of tribal "mask." He wears the
scalp and long, blonde hair of a woman; his eyes are
shaded black; he uses a dark, "earthly" shade of tan to
pencil his eyebrows; his left nipple is pierced with a
large gold ring; each finger on his left hand and three on
his right carries a weighty silver ring; his chest and
right hand are adorned with tattoos, the designs of which
can be found below.
on the hand
L— O
on the abdomen
m—TT
Masking, painting, art, and dance are significant
components in the novice's liminal phase, and it is here
that Turner's analysis of tribal ritual in the truly
liminal becomes critical:
...the factors or elements of culture may be
recombined in numerous, often grotesque ways,
grotesque because they are arrayed in terms of
possible or fantasized (italics mine) rather
than experienced combinations -- thus a monster
disguise may combine human, animal, and vegetable
features in an "unnatural" way.^*^
As Gumb rises and begins his dance -- a slow and
deliberate movement, involving mainly the upper body -- he
veils his brightly-colored scarf over his shoulders,
looking into the camera and singing aloud one sentence of
lyrics with the music he has chosen to accompany his
ritual: "I'm flying, crying, dying, over you." Unclothed
and in general solitude, Gumb has set up his ritual very
adroitly: "transformation occurs," Turner writes, "most
radically in the ritual 'pupation ' of liminal seclusion"
(italics mine).^^ The notion of association with general
oppositions in ritual is here -- life and death, male and
female -- and, as Gumb tucks his penis between his legs
and steps back for the camera, raising aloft his scarf-
draped arms, we see his illusion of rebirth: "so powerful,
so beautiful." And with wings ready for flight.
Unlike tribal ritual, however, which is generally
seen as beneficial for the culture of which it is a part,
Gumb's animosity towards his culture turns his actions
inward, focusing the ritual purely on himself and his own
transformation. He believes that he what he is doing is
right for him. On staging this scene, Demme comments:
It was critical to understand that he shouldn 't be
doing this. He's dead wrong. This is someone who
is so completely, completely horrified by who he is
that his desperation to become someone completely
other is manifested in his ill-guided attempts at
transvestism.
These "attempts" propel the story of Silence, as well as
actuate two genuine transformations in the course of the
narrative: those of Catherine Martin and Clarice Starling,
two characters deliberately named for birds -- because
they will each need, in the course of the story, to learn
to fly if they are to survive.
Chapter Four:
Raised on Promises
"I have come to the borders of sleep.
The unfathomable deep
Forest where all must lose
Their way, however straight.
Or winding, soon or late;
They cannot choose."
Edward Thomas
"Well, she was an American girl
Raised on promises
She couldn't help thinking that
there was a little more to life
somewhere else..."
Tom Petty
She drives alone. It is night in Memphis, and
with the exception of one pair of headlights behind her,
there seem to be few other cars on the road. Her body
moving in time with a song on her radio, she vigorously
taps the beat on her steering wheel, singing and rocking
along. The song is Tom Petty's "American Girl," and she
is exactly that. She seems what we would like to be the
quintessential young American woman: strong; stocky
without being overweight; clearly enjoying this moment in
the same way, we can guess, that she enjoys the rest of
her life. As the story progresses, we will learn much
about her, not the least of which that her mother is a
United States senator. More important, however, is what
will happen to Catherine Martin as the result of her
imprisonment by Buffalo Bill.
Stepping out of the car at her apartment, she calls
to her anxiously waiting cat, which gazes at her through
the window. Hearing a noise, she turns to find a man with
his arm in a cast trying to load a heavy recliner into a
van; she watches for a few moments, and we can see in her
eyes the decision being made: should I or shouldn't I?
She does, finally, and is quickly loaded into the van to
be knocked unconscious. After having her shirt checked to
be certain that she is the correct size, she is taken away
to be imprisoned in a well in the home of Jame Gumb.
Here begins one of the most important transitions
in the course of the film. We have seen that Gumb wants
for himself nothing more than change and a crossing of
thresholds; he cannot ultimately achieve them, and instead
inadvertently forces these transitions into the lives of
Martin and Clarice Starling. I use the word "forces" here
because neither, particularly Martin, wants this
transition to occur. She is taken against her will from
just outside of her own home, and, until the story's
conclusion, literally does not know from minute to minute
whether she will survive to see the next.
Here I would like to briefly outline another
structural model for finding meaning within Turner's
theories of culture and transition, which will lead us
further into an understanding of the characters'
transitions: that of the social drama. "A spontaneous
component of social process," the social drama is deeply
connected to the concept of rites of passage. Referred to
by Kenneth Burke as "dramas of living," social dramas
occur within groups connected by common values and
concerns, sharing a real or alleged mutual history.
Turner breaks the process down into four distinct phases:
"breach, crisis, redress, and either reintegration or
recognition of schism,or separation. As Catherine
Martin's abduction fits Turner's model accurately, let us
look briefly at each.
The social drama begins with the violation, or
breach, of a norm within a public arena. The emotional
climate of the group is suddenly made choppy and full of
thunder: out of something as simple as an especially
heated argument, as intricate as a deliberate and
calculated demonstration of desired power, or even an act
of violence, a public breach within the normal workings
of society has occurred. A moral rule, law or custom has
been publicly defiled, and a building sense of crisis
follows. Turner refers to this as a turning point in
which the event is processed by all members of the group,
sides are taken, and factions are formed. "Critics of
crisis" then seek to restore peace. These critics are
usually those "with a strong interest in maintaining the
status quo ante, the elders, lawmakers, administrators,
judges, priests, and law enforcers of the relevant
community.Unless the conflict can be quickly sealed
away within a smaller group, then
there is a tendency for the breach to widen and
spread until it coincides with some dominant
cleavage in the widest set of relevant social
relations to which the parties in the conflict
belong.
All or some of the "peacekeepers," if you will, then
attempt to create and apply redressive machinery to remedy
the situation, through the juridicial means of law and the
juridicial process, or "the ritual means provided by
religious institutions."^^
Redress is, for Turner as well as the purposes of
our discussion, the most crucial piece of the social
drama, for it is where true reflection — and van Gennep's
notion of liminality -- can occur. This ritual tends to
involve some kind of literal or moral "sacrifice," a
casualty "as scapegoat for the group's 'sin' or redressive
violence. The final phase depends intimately upon the
redress period; that is, there occurs either a
reintegration of the disturbed social member or group
(although personal and group dynamics will certainly have
been altered to some degree), or an agreement to differ,
which will sometimes lead to a spatial separation.
A social drama in Silence is, of course, set into
motion by Gumb's actions: as the film opens, people seem
aware that the serial murderer "Buffalo Bill" exists and
is a threat; and, with all of the mystery which surrounds
his actions, an oddly intriguing threat as well. The
social drama does not reach a grand scale, however, until
Gumb kidnaps and begins to starve Catherine Martin. The
daughter of a United States senator (a female senator, no
less), Martin's abduction suddenly creates a true crisis
for the country, transforming the case into a social race
against time, whose players go well beyond Martin and
Gumb to involve no less than the media, the police, the
FBI, the senator herself, and even the President. The
drama which I would like to focus upon on here, however,
is that which occurs between Catherine Martin and Jame
Gumb.
Turner reminds us that an extended liminal phase in
passage is often marked by physical separation from the
rest of society, as well as a parallel passage in space.
The crossing from the world above and into the pit
certainly represents a literal passage, but this
transition actually begins when Martin, just prior to her
capture, is asked by Giimb to step into his van so that she
can help pull the chair into the back. After a brief
moment of hesitation -- which Gumb reads, telling her how
much he appreciates her assistance -- she steps up and
into the van, literally crossing a threshold into her own
rite of passage; which, like so many of the images being
addressed, can be specially framed and highlighted within
the medium of film.
After Martin's abduction (the breach), the next
time that we see her is huddled at the bottom of a deep
and lightless pit made of concrete and brick. Barefoot
and stripped down to thin, flimsy cotton clothing, covered
with soot and dirt, and soaked from sweat and water
sprayed at her through a powerful hose, she is literally
in the depths. In the following dialogue -- the first
that we see between Martin and Gumb — the camera moves
between shots from her point of view and shots from behind
his head; in these shots, we see from the small light Gumb
hangs into the chasm how deep in the well and small she
is, dwarfed by the rock and blackness surrounding her.
Gumb.
It rubs the lotion on its skin, it does this
whenever it's told.
Martin.
Mister, my family will pay cash, whatever ransom
you're asking for, they'll pay it...
Gumb.
It rubs the lotion on its skin, or else it gets the
hose again. (Precious, in Gumb's arms, barks.)
Yes it will. Precious, it will get the hose.
Martin.
Okay...okay, okay...okay...okay...Mister, if you
let me go, I won't press charges, I promise. See,
my mom is a very important woman, I guess you
already know that...
Gumb.
Now it places the lotion in the basket.
Martin (beginning to sob).
Please...please... I want to go home, I want to go
home...please..
Gumb.
It places the lotion in the basket.
Martin.
I want to see my mommy, please...1 want to see my
mommy...
Gumb.
Put the fucking lotion in the basket!
Martin does so, letting her eyes move up the stone wall
before her. It is one of the first times she has been
able to see her enclosings at all; she discovers scratch
marks, blood, and a fingernail within its crevices. Terror
overcomes her as crisis sets in: she realizes that she is
not the first to be trapped here, and any who preceded her
are most likely dead. She screams loudly and repeatedly;
Gumb, studying her, then begins to imitate her shrieks,
manipulating his shirt to mimic breasts.
In his analysis of the phenomenology of initiation
(or "a spiritual maturing"), Eliade points out that the
initiation ceremony begins not only with the separation of
the candidate from his family; it involves a substantial
period of time in the bush. "Here already," he writes,
"there is a symbol of death; the forest, the jungle,
darkness symbolize the beyond, the 'infernal regions.'"^®
The bush represents for many the swallowing of the
initiate by a monster, in the belly of whom there is
"cosmic night; it is the embryonic mode of existence, both
on the cosmic plane and the plane of human life." Here
the liminal and the redressive phases can be seen as one.
As in the liminal phase of initiation, Martin is "at once
dying from or dead to [her] former status and life, and
being born and growing into [a new one]."^^ Covered with
earth, she is stripped of herself in her symbolic grave.
Her clothing and shoes are taken away, as are her name and
gender: "It rubs the lotion on its skin," Gumb says, "or
else it gets the hose again." It as at this point that
Martin breaks dovm in despair and horror at what is
happening to her. In the cosmic night of her pit, she
must symbolically die in order that she experience a
"regression to the embryonic state.
The next time we see Martin is in a series of
scenes intercut with Gumb's previously discussed
transformation dance and ritual. Martin has realized that
"Precious," Gumb's tiny toy poodle, is his Achille's heel.
"Thanks for the scraps, asshole," she says. "I've got a
better idea." We can hear that her voice has deepened,
turning her desperation into something more powerful.
Left behind is the terrified "American Girl"; while still
motivated by fear, her terror and dread have now sparked a
determination to survive at any cost; the beginnings, for
Eliade, of rebirth. As she speaks, we see that she is
more wet, and dirtier even than before; she is more
primeval. She breathes heavily, tying a long string to
the bone of a chicken and a bucket to create a primitive
trap: one which, she hopes, will be able to capture
Precious and become her chance to escape.
Before she calls to Precious, the camera finds her
looking upward, her face determined, her eyes hopeful.
Eliade stresses that all forms of cosmos -- universe,
house, human body, temple -- have an "opening" above.
"The opening makes possible passage from one mode of being
to another, from one existential situation to another,
and she knows that this opening, at once a symbolic hell
and regenerative womlD, is her only chance: not only for
survival, but for a rebirth in which everything can begin
anew.
Her words ring out as she calls to the tiny dog,
writes Peter Travers, "like a call to arms,"^^ as she
whistles and tries to not be heard by Gumb:
Precious? Come on, girl...come on. Precious! I
got a yummy yummy snack for you... Precious? Are
you up there, you little shit? Come and get it,
pretty girl... please, come on...
Seeing no reaction to her endeavor, it is here that her
faith begins to wane. She closes her eyes and begins to
sob, her attempts at whistling nothing more than tiny
exhalations of air. And just as she seems to have given
up to the fear surrounding her. Precious pokes her head
into the opening of the pit and barks. Demme here gives
us a beautiful close-up of Martin's face: her mouth opens
in a smile while her eyes — and, we know, her soul —
open with hope.
While her first attempt fails -- ending with the
bucket falling into the pit and onto her head, entangling
her with string and forcing her to weakly collapse into a
fetal position -- she eventually is able to succeed in
seizing Precious-. Gumb hears the dog crying, and calls to
her, to which Martin responds: "Down here, you sack of
shit!" We can see and hear genuine concern in Gumb's
reaction here, and when he looks into the pit and sees
that Precious is indeed hurt and trapped in Martin's arms,
it is instantly clear that she has a chance. Precious is
his weakness: he gasps, begins to pace, and softens his
voice. Catherine Martin and Jame Gumb each are desperate
for transition here: either she will escape to be
reintegrated, or he will regain control and be one step
closer to completing his woman's suit and "metamorphosis."
What follows, then, is not only a clash between two forces
for survival; what we also see is a battle for
transformation...and one in which Martin, though
terrified, releases and reckons with her primal and
animalistic instinct to survive.
Giimb.
Put her in that bucket.
Martin.
No 1 You get me a telephone and lower it down here
now!
Gumb. (beginning to sob).
Little poodly-poo? Precious, darling, are you all
right?
Martin.
She's in a lot of pain, mister. She needs a vet.
She broke her leg on the way down, I know it.
Gumb.
DON'T YOU HURT MY DOG!
Martin.
DON'T YOU MAKE ME HURT YOUR DOG I
Gumb.
You don't know what pain is!
Starling distracts Gumb here by ringing the
doorbell and beginning to pursue him through the house.
When she enters the room which contains the pit, gun
drawn, she calls out to Martin, moving carefully about to
be sure that Gumb is nowhere to be found. We realize from
what Martin says in response, as well as the way she says
it, that this liminal period has been worse than anything
she could have dreamed -- and that her misery has awakened
in her a reaction very different from the "Thank God
you're here" we might expect. Note also that we never see
her speaking these words; we only her voice wailing out of
the depths of her pit.
starling.
Catherine Martin?
Martin.
YES!
Starling.
FBI...you're safe...
Martin.
"Safe," shit, get me out of here!
starling (locks door, continues to move about the room).
You're all right now, Catherine, now where is he?
Martin.
How the fuck should I know, just get me out of
here!
starling (looks into well, sees Catherine).
Oh my God. Catherine, I'm going to get you out of
there, but right now you listen to me. I've got to
leave this room. I'll be right back.
Martin.
NO! Don't you leave me here, you fucking bitch 1
NOOOO! Don't you leave me here! This guy's
crazy, PLEASE, I gotta get out of here I PLEASE 1
Starling is finally able to help Martin escape,
and, in the film's denouement, we finally get to see the
senator's daughter in daylight: eyes focused on the ground
(from where, symbolically, she has come), she is slowly
led to the outside world. She has not been cleaned up: a
blanket around her shoulders; she is still wet; still
covered in dirt and filth; exhausted. As Eliade
elaborates:
In initiatory contexts death signifies passing
beyond the profane, unsanctified condition, the
condition of the "natural man," who is without
religious experience, who is blind to spirit. The
mystery of initiation gradually reveals to the
novice the true dimensions of existence; by
introducing him to the sacred, it obliges him to
assume the responsibility that goes with being a
man .... (F)or all archaic societies, access to
spirituality finds expression in a symbolism of
death and a new birth.^3
She holds Precious -- the only thing which we know Giimb
loved -- tight to her chest, and we sense somehow that she
will care for the tiny dog, coping with her own wounds
through serving as guardian ... while not allowing herself
to forget her time in the depths. Catherine Martin's
wounds and their memory will always remain with her.
Through her time in the abyss, however, she has reached
deep into the depths of her soul to discover a fierce
determination, a new s ense of being, a new sense of
strength. Through the liminal, she has been reborn.
C3iapter Five:
Fly Away, Starling
"Therefore we, before him bending.
This great Sacrament revere;
Types and shadows have their ending.
For newer rite is here."
St. Thomas Aquinas
While our first vision of Catherine Martin is that
of the "American Girl," singing proudly with her radio on
a late-night drive, our initial impression of Clarice
Starling is that of a woman in struggle. As the film's
opening shot fades up within a wooded area underneath a
gray sky, Howard Shore's musical score combines a sense of
impending danger with one of wonder. We are looking down
a steep bluff, and it is here that we meet Starling: hair
pulled back, sweatshirt drenched, and clinging to a rope,
she pulls herself forward and up without hesitation or
looking back. She digs her feet into the earth, using it
for support and balance. What exactly is happening at
this point is unclear: is she the first victim in the
story, running from an unseen force? She stands and
catches her breath, turning to face her next step. A bird
loudly flaps its wings, catching her attention; she
acknowledges it, inhales and moves on. We then follow her
through the obstacle course into which she places all of
her energy, and we realize that she is not in any
immediate danger; she has placed herself here for
training. "[She is J not fleeing from the killer, but
maybe fleeing from her past, or her average self. It's
Aspiration that drives her obsessively -- to change
herself, to become something better.Covered in
sweat, fiercely determined and unwilling to quit, we see
that Starling's journey will, from the outset, be an
uphill struggle.
Starling's physical regimen in these scenes
connects iiranediately with Turner's notion of spatial
movement in a rite of passage. While she does not
necessarily cross a threshold here, the dirt around the
hill she climbs resembles a sort of pit, similar to the
one which will soon house Catherine Martin. Our first
glimpse of Starling comes only when her hands emerge from
below and slowly pull herself up the rope -- and out of
the "pit" — to stand before us. Again, we know that this
is only the beginning for Starling. Turner writes that
the spatial passage "may involve a long, exacting
pilgrimage and the crossing of many national frontiers
before the subject reaches his goal, the sacred shrine.
Starling will eventually cross state lines by air and
automobile; she will pursue and be pursued; she will be
left in literal and figurative darkness; her mind will be
toyed with; semen will be thrown into her face. This
journey will, without question, be exacting.
Starling is aware of the level of danger inherent
in her work, and the opening shows her determination to be
as prepared as possible for her expedition. In training
for the FBI, we see her in various stages of initiation:
running, boxing, gunfire, and staged arrests, during one
of which she is "shot" from behind. As she runs through
the film's opening obstacle course, she passes a tree
which offers a credo which will eventually save her life:
with one word each painted on five small boards and nailed
down the side of a tree, we read:
HURT
AGONY
PAIN
LOVE IT
And the last board, weathered and barely legible:
OR DIE
By making the final sign difficult to read, Demme reminds
us that we must be highly aware of our surroundings and
constantly remain alert to avoid destruction and death;
Starling's level of rigor demonstrates that she is doing
just that.
We learn during the course of the film that
Starling suffered trauma in childhood: after losing her
mother at a very young age, her father, a town marshal,
died a month after sustaining injuries while trying to
stop a robbery. We get the sense early in the film that
she is devoting herself to her work because it is
something that she must do. Our feelings are confirmed
near the film's conclusion, as she relates the story of
her attempt to rescue a family of lambs from slaughter;
their screaming — which Starling tried but was ultimately
powerless to stop — haunts and drives her. Starling
works because she has to.
Turner points out a connection between this notion
of work and the divine: in tribal, "simpler," and "small-
scale societies," ritual is considered work; specifically,
"what the Tikopia call 'the work of the Gods.' ... In the
third chapter of Bhagavad Gita (v. 14-15), we find a
connection made between sacrifice and wo rk: 'From food do
all contingent beings derive, and food derives from rain;
rain derives from sacrifice and sacrifice from work.^"^^
In the course of her journey. Starling will need to
sacrifice a great deal. These sacrifices, however, will
become an intricate part of her rite of passage. In spite
of (and possibly because of) tremendous opposition.
Starling continues to move, to sacrifice, and grow closer
to the sacred transition which only her work will bring
her.
Starling, again, has her work cut out for her from
the beginning. Demme reminds us consistently throughout
the picture that Starling is a woman in a man's world.
Starling -- herself no more than 5'4" tall -- is regularly
being challenged or dwarfed by men. She enters an
elevator to stand amidst six males, all taller than she
and clad in red shirts, emphasizing the fact that she is
absolutely different. Men turn to leer as she and her
roommate, Ardelia (played by Kasi Lemmons), jog by; and,
although he clearly admires her, she is often subtly
treated as inferior by Jack Crawford. As they drive (he
in the front passenger seat, she in the rear) towards a
West Virginia funeral home to examine the body of one of
Buffalo Bill's victims. Starling attempts to maintain her
professionalism while expressing her feelings of
manipulation and dismissal:
starling.
You haven't mentioned anything about the
information contained in my report, or Dr. Lecter's
offer, sir.
Crawford.
I'm considering it.
starling.
That's why you sent me in there, isn't it? To get
his help on Buffalo Bill, sir?
(Crawford looks at her.)
Well, if that was the case, then I just...I Just
wish I was in on it, that's all.
Crawford.
If I'd sent you in there with an actual agenda,
Lecter would have known it instantly- He would
have toyed with you, then turned to stone.
Before Starling can respond, Crawford turns away -- as the
car drives through a tunnel, surrounding Starling in
literal as well as figurative darkness.
It is Dr. Frederick Chilton, however, who
provides Starling with one of her greatest obstacles and
the film with one of its strongest insights into dilemmas
within our culture. Her stance during their first meeting
in his office reveals that his very presence makes her
physically uncomfortable, and not without reason. He has
not said two sentences to her before making an advance:
"You know, we get a lot of detectives in here, but I must
say I can't ever remember one as attractive," he says,
grinning into the camera. "Will you be in Baltimore
overnight? Because this can be quite a fun town if you
have the right guide." More embarrassed than humiliated
-- her sawy choice of words indicates that she has been
in similar situations before -- she politely wards him
off.
As played by Anthony Heald, Dr. Chilton is clearly
a "good man" in his own eyes: he is a Doctor, and in
charge of the asylum in which Hannibal Lecter is a
prisoner; he gains all necessary approval and credit for
his work. But when Starling, enclosed in the varying
shades of brown which dominate Chilton's office, makes
clear that she is there to do a job, his entire mood and
persona changes. His smile vanishes, the small talk and
"conversation" turns to "Let's get this over with," and he
quickly rises, grasping a photograph from his desk. As
they near Lecter's cell, Chilton stops in a shadowed
hallway to display the picture to Starling.
The photograph is that of a nurse, maimed nine
years earlier when attending to Lecter. The doctors did
manage to reset her jaw, Chilton explains, but were only
able to save one of her eyes. Starling's reaction to this
picture, captured in close-up and bathed in red light, is
one of revulsion shielded by a characteristic attempt at
composure. Chilton's presenting this photograph to
Starling could easily be justified as a necessity in
preparing a subject to visit Lecter. The mann&r in which
Chilton does so, however, is indicative of a highly
intentionalized act- Lifting it from his desk immediately
upon his rejection makes one wonder if, had Starling
agreed to a date with him, he might not have simply
described the nurse's injuries to her. As the faintest
hint of a smile develops on his face, he tells her that
Lecter's "pulse never got above 185...even when he ate her
tongue." And so proceeds the relationship between
Starling and Chilton; while he does not attempt another
sexual advance, she consistently has to get past him --
the proverbial lion at the gate -- to reach Lecter.
While well-played by Brian Cox in Manhunter, it is
Anthony Hopkins' interpretation which has burned the name
Hannibal Lecter into our vernacular. Lecter is brilliant,
manipulative, strong, courteous, terrifying, violent, and
fascinating. As I watched the film for the first time
that night in 1991, I recall growing sympathetic to and
actually fond of him; perhaps, I thought, all of the
murders and cannibalistic acts which led to his
imprisonment were exaggerations, even mistakes. Serving
as Starling's guide, he was so clearly doing good for her;
he couldn't be a monster capable of such heinous, evil
actions. Then he attacked and killed two Memphis security
guards, clubbing one to death and removing the facial skin
of the other in order to make his escape, and my fondness
drained away; this character was suddenly very much a
figure of evil, and I was lost in frustration.
Demme wants us to feel this way. The Silence of
the Lambs is a visceral experience. He wants us to react
physically, so that we perceive the story's events with
Starling, living the captivation and repulsion of Hannibal
Lecter. The opposition between Lecter and Chilton
represents one of the great paradoxes of our culture: the
culturally honored and "respected" Doctor Chilton is
actually selfish, self-centered, and out for little more
than his own glory; Doctor Lecter, the cultural
abhorration, is the most positive model for the growth and
transformation of Clarice Starling, and never pretends to
be anything other than what he is. It is what he is, of
course, which is nearly inexplicable for us. Lecter tests
Starling, becomes familiar with her spirit, and ultimately
recognizes that she must go through a rite of passage in
order that she may fly. This rite will be absolutely
fraught with peril, but he knows that she must experience
and be wounded by it if she is to transform. How
beautifully ironic within our culture that her guide
through darkness is darkness himself.
In many Native American cultures, there is an
understanding of the "devil" as being not only a
malevolent force, but an educator. Stories of passage
often find the initiand being guided through the liminal
not by a friendly teacher or wise old seer, but by a
figure of blackness, of the wicked; without this, they
feel, there is no way to ultimately comprehend evil, of
understanding the darkness of the world, which is within
all of us. Frederick Buechner, American novelist, poet,
and minister makes the following observation:
I suppose that the whole obsession of our time with
the monstrous in general -- with the occult and the
demonic, with exorcism and black magic and the
great white shark -- is at its heart only the
shadow side of our longing for the beatific, and
we are like the knight in Ingmar Bergman's film
The Seventh Seal, who tells the young witch about
to be burned at the stake that he wants to meet the
devil her master, and when she asks him why, he
says, "I want to ask him about God. He, if anyone,
must know."57
We learn during their first scene together what
Lecter wants for Starling. To reach his cell, she must
first walk down a long, darkened corridor, surrounded on
all sides by men who have been labeled insane. One stares
blankly at her; another leans against the bars of his cell
to lasciviously say "Hi"; and finally, one bounces
throughout his quarters, gaping at her and hissing that "I
can smell your cunt."
When she reaches Lecter and begins her initial
dialogue with him, he reveals that he was able to discern
whispers in the corridor. After being shown her FBI
credentials, the first question he asks Starling is what
"Multiple Miggs" actually said to her. She responds
truthfully -- "He said 'I smell your cunt'" -- and Lecter
does not flinch. "I see," he says. "I myself cannot."
He then slowly raises his head towards the air holes in
the glass of his cell partition, breathing in deeply: "You
use Evian skin cream, and sometimes you wear L'Air du
Temps...but not today-" While in one sense as carnal as
what Miggs said, Lecter goes immediately beyond the crass
and into a different sort of carnal observation
altogether: that of what she puts upon her body, her skin.
Simple vulgarities are easy to dismiss; Lecter's
intelligent, precise, and accurate observations are not.
Here is an indication that this entire scene will serve as
a testing of Starling: to have a man identify a skin
cream worn possibly a day or more in the past, smelled
through small holes in his plexiglass barrier six feet
above the ground, could easily make anyone weak with
intimidation,
Starling perseveres. She politely continues in an
attempt at an informal questioning of Lecter, to which he
responds with a soul-piercing gaze, reasonably neutral
answers, and a smile. He warms up considerably when she
clumsily attempts to make casual a request that he
complete a questionnaire. He expresses disappointment in
her lack of absolute honesty:
Oh, no, no, no, no. You were doing fine. You had
been courteous and receptive to courtesy; you had
established trust with the embarrassing truth about
Miggs...and now this ham-handed segue into your
questionnaire. It won't do.
Starling repeats the request, a stronger edge in her
voice. Their dialogue continues, and just as Starling's
guard drops, Lecter snaps into a brutal scrutinization of
her character.
You're so simbitious, aren't you? You know what you
look like to me, with your good bag and your cheap
shoes? You look like a rube. A well-scrubbed,
hustling rube...with a little taste. Good
nutrition's given you some length of bone, but
you're not more than one generation from poor white
trash, are you. Agent Starling? And that accent
you've tried so desperately to shed, pure West
Virginia. What is your father, is he a "coal
minah," does he stink of the land? You know how
quickly the boys find you, all those tedious,
sticky fumblings in the back seats of cars, while
you could only dream of getting out, getting
anywhere, all the way to the F-B-I.
It is here that Starling proves herself a formidable match
for Lecter. She takes a breath, acknowledges that he sees
"a lot," and quickly reverses his offensive: is he strong
enough, she asks, to turn his razor-sharp insight onto
himself? Initially, he seems to reject Starling and this
challenge, turning away and walking to the other side of
his cell. But as he moves, his words prove that he does
see her as ready for initiation, if she so chooses: "You
fly back to school now, little Starling. Fly, fly, fly."
Starling having proven her mettle, Lecter recognizes that
it is indeed time for her transformation; but, as with
most of what he says, he makes this point cryptically-
Regardless, like the bird after which she is named, it is
time for her to learn to fly.
As Starling begins to move away from Lecter's cell,
a naked and masturbating Miggs screeches "Look at the
blonde!" and throws semen into her face. This in itself
is telling: Starling is clearly not blonde; Miggs, like
most men in the film, is literally unable to see Starling
for what she is or of what she is capable. Lecter,
hearing the attack, throws himself with spectacular force
and speed against the plexiglass wall of his cell. His
calling out in her defense is the only time in the entire
film that he raises his voice:
Lecter.
Agent Starling! Come back! I would never have had
that happen to you. Discourtesy is extremely ugly
to me.
starling.
Then do this test for me!
Lecter.
No, but I will make you happy. I'll give you a
chance for what you love most.
starling.
And what is that. Doctor?
Lecter.
Advancement, of course. Listen carefully, look
deep within yourself, Clarice Starling. Go seek
out Miss Mofet, an old patient of mine. M-O-F-E-T.
Go now, I don't think Miggs could manage again
quite so soon, even though he is crazy. Go now!
later learn that this final advice was also essentially
cryptic: "Hester Mofet," an anagram for "The rest of me,"
never existed, and "Look deep within yourself" leads
Starling to Baltimore's "Your Self Storage," where Lecter
has rented a large space under Mof et' s neime. By making
this connection and literally looking into "your self,"
Starling proves to Lecter that she is meritorious and
ready for edification.
Some critics of the film have dismissed Lecter's
intentions as purely sexual. Elayne Rapping, in The
Progressive, writes that Starling is Lecter's "prey, as
much as the other monster is hers, and his sexual interest
in her -- played out as a flirtation of the most
stereotypically sexist kind -- is apparent."5® Ms.
Rapping's reading of the sexual into the relationship
between Starling and Lecter entirely misinterprets the
film's themes. Immediately following the incident with
Miggs and the processing of Lecter's aggressively driven
"clues," Starling walks slowly to her car and experiences
an early memory of her father, spinning her in the air
upon his return from work; within the flashback, the
camera then pans up to a shot of the sky, once again
bringing us an image of flight. Lecter is manipulative,
and he does play elaborate mental games with Starling.
But he does this not for his own sexual gratification.
Recognizing that she needs to experience the journey, his
questioning and ingenious "games" force her to find her
own wings. As he says, he will give her a chance for what
she loves most: "Advancement." He refers not, however, to
advancement in the workplace; advancement of her spirit is
what he desires.
Rapping's next statement, asserting that Starling
is left at the film's conclusion "in a state of permanent
anxiety because [Lecter] may at any moment decide to come
after her" is not only thematically questionable it is
proven inaccurate by the script itself. "The only reason
he does not do so, he makes clear," Rapping concludes, "is
because he finds her cute-"^^ Lecter, in point of fact,
tells Starling that he has no intention of coming after
her because "the world is much more interesting with you
in it." Nowhere is the word "cute" mentioned in the
scene, and a careful observer of the film will see that
the intellectual dynamics between Lecter and Starling
prevent the concept of "cute" even from implication. It
is one thing for Ms. Rapping to interpret their
relationship as being sexually charged; the sheer
intensity of their dialogues makes this understandable.
But to literally adjust the script to serve one's own
needs is another thing entirely. Rapping, it seems, had
an agenda which could not be bothered by a meticulous look
at the film itself.
As the film progresses, it becomes clear that
Lecter is the only man who refuses to socially categorize
Starling; this refusal brings to mind what Turner refers
to as social "segmentalization."
In people's social structural relationships they
are by various abstract processes generalized and
segmentalized into roles, statuses, classes,
cultural sexes, conventional age-divisions, ethnic
affiliations, etc. In different types of social
situations they have been conditioned to play
specific social roles. It does not matter how well
or badly as long as they "make like" they are
obedient to the norm-sets that control different
compartments of the complex model known as the
"social structure
Chilton sees her as an object unworthy of real respect,
and she is treated as a permanent student by Crawford,
incapable of working in the harshest elements of the case
until the film's conclusion. Only Lecter sees her as she
is, understands that she must cope with her past before
she can take flight, and then forces her to look into her
"self" and become something stronger, through his quid pro
quo line of questioning.
The notion of exchange and duality within Lecter
and the film brings to mind Turner's encounter with the
Entity known in Rio de Janeiro as Exu. "Lecter," writes
Kathleen Murphy in Film Comment, "is consulted by cops as
an oracle, and acts as high priest to those acolytes who
strive, as he has, to transform themselves, triggering
their evolution in rites of human sacrifice."Exu^
Turner says, is sometimes represented with two heads (one
that of Christ; the other, Satan); he is
the Lord of the Limen and of Chaos, the full
ambiguity of the subjunctive mood of culture,
representing the indeterminancy that lurks in the
cracks and crevices of all socio-cultural
constructions of reality ... he is the abyss of
possibility.
While other forces in the film attempt to hold Starling
back -- in one scene, Crawford literally tells a West
Virginia sheriff that they should discuss a brutal murder
in a separate room so as not to include her -- Lecter
himself represents possibility. Turner continues: for
Brazilians, Exu is "the one who must be kept at bay if the
framed order of the ritual proceedings is to go forward
according to protocol (italics mine) ... hence he has two
heads, for he is both potential savior and tempter."^2
Late in the film, after Starling has completely
opened her soul to Lecter, he whispers, tears in his eyes,
"Thank you, Clarice... thank you." Are these tears the
result of a sexual charge? No; rather, Lecter knows that
this is what she needed to do in order to move towards
transformation. His tears are seen most clearly a moment
later, as Lecter hears Chilton and Memphis security enter
the room to remove Starling. This leaves one to consider
whether his tears are furthered because he knows that he
cannot now, with anyone else present, give her the
information that she needs to complete her work. And just
as we wonder if he is simply a misunderstood human being
who truly is "good," he murders his two security guards,
creating a mask from the face of one and mounting the
butterflied body of the other onto his cage walls.
Silverthorne continues:
He acknowledges a plurality of selves ... On
one side in the movie [are] the many visual
suggestions of outspread wings, and Hannibal's
pressure, whispered to Clarice, 'Spread your wings,
little Starling, and fly-' On the other side is a
universe of Jame Gumbs, who carves two diamond
patterns (dressmaker's darts, a 'taking in' device)
on a dead woman's back, fatally clipping her
wings.
Like Exu, Lecter is both liberator and destroyer. He
seems to possess a certain deity-like omniscience: as the
first step in his master plan of escape, he manages to
steal Dr. Chilton's pen while enclosed in a straitjacket
and bodycage; he observes that Starling's leg wound
achieved when exploring her "Self" has stopped bleeding
without being able to see her leg or ever being told that
she was even injured.
We have a tendency in America to label that we
which cannot understand, and Silence, with all of its
horrifying subject matter, points us to a questioning of
our own symbol system. Hannibal Lecter is, actually, not
the real "monster" in the story: while usually enigmatic,
he is consistently truthful with Starling, treating her as
an equal; and, most importantly, he acts according to his
nature. Right down to his agnomen, there is never any
question about who or what Hannibal "The Cannibal" is.
The real "monsters" of the story are those whose
actions may not appear ominous or threatening outright,
but whose inner workings within our culture make them
dangerous to us and our psyches. From Dr. Chilton's first
attempt at flirting with Starling and his angry reaction
to rejection, we know that this is not a man who can be
trusted: as was discussed, he moves from an attempt at
charm to outright bitterness in a heartbeat. Even his
initial reflections on Lecter -- from a research
perspective, Lecter is their "most prized asset" -- give
us a man out for little more than his own gain. As
Clarice is a sexual object for Chilton, Lecter is an
object to enhance his notoriety. Recognizing Chilton's
monstrosity, Lecter has refused to cooperate with him,
leaving Chilton's dreams of endless accolades to crumble
within a plexiglass cell. And now, when Lecter strays
even remotely from Chilton's ideals, Chilton asserts his
cultural position of power -- head of a psychiatric
institute -- and systematically tortures Lecter: he
attempts to lock away the creative spirit by removing
Lecter's drawings; he broadcasts religious television
programming at stentorian levels into Lecter's cell.
Chilton's labeling of Lecter as a "monster" indicates that
their battle is personal, and, having lost his desired
fame, he is not about to waste his time trying to
understand his prisoner in the way which Clarice Starling
attempts.
Mid-story, we discover that Chilton has been using
a microphone to listen to the interviews between Lecter
and Starling, not for anthropological or research
purposes, but to capture the upper hand. As Chilton later
tries to pry further information on Buffalo Bill from
Lecter, he lies back comfortably on a medical cot to taunt
his strait-jacketed and wire-masked "patient":
You still think you're gonna walk on the beach and
see the birdies? (He laughs.) No, I don't think
so. I called Senator Ruth Martin; she never heard
of any deal with you. (He smiles at Lecter.) They
scammed you, Hannibal. (He gestures to his aide.)
Stand outside. And shut the door. (The aide
exits, leaving them alone. Chilton stands, and,
close to Lecter, looks right into his eyes.) There
never was a deal with Senator Martin, but there is
now. I designed it. Of course, I worked in a few
conditions for my own benefit as well.
The psychological and emotional torment which Chilton's
self-serving tunnel-vision inflicts on those around him
make this character, "played to smarmy perfection by
Anthony Heald,a more frightening presence within our
culture than the other "psychopaths" of the story...and
one whose type most of us will have a greater chance of
encountering in our lifetimes than a Hannibal Lecter.
It is no surprise, then, that Lecter pursues
Chilton all the way to Haiti upon his escape. "I
thought," Demme states, "you really had to get a sense in
a very brief time that Lecter had tracked Chilton to the
ends of the earth, a place that redefines 'off the beaten
track.' It also should come as no surprise that
Lecter's final line in the film -- "I'm having an old
friend for dinner -- actually carries with it an odd sense
of justice and comeuppance, garnering audience applause
and an understanding of the dynamics between these two
very different men. Who, we must ask, is the real
monster? And are we, in cheering this sort of poetic
justice, briefly identifying with the dark side of
ourselves? Certainly -- and this is good for us and our
culture.
Lecter's straitjacket and masking are worthy of
discussion here. According to Turner, "Liminality is both
more creative and more destructive than the structural
norm. In either case it raises basic problems for social
structural man, invites him to speculation and
criticism.As we reflect on our culture's method of
dealing with that which is outside of its comprehension,
it becomes clear that we can be impatient in America with
anything which moves outside of the canonical; not knowing
how to deal with these "challenges," we lock them away or
cover their faces with protective masks. In his scenes
with Starling, Lecter's voice is crisp, soft-spoken, and
polite; it is clear that he feels trusted and respected by
her for who and what he is, and treats her accordingly,
he is also in some sense of control. Later in the film,
he is transferred to Tennessee to meet with Senator Ruth
Martin (played by Tracey Walter). Confined in a
straitjacket, tied down, with a grotesque plastic and
metal mask covering his mouth and jaw, Lecter's entire
manner is literally altered by his masking. His voice
deepens; his head, when he is being moved, tilts back as
his eyes roll up towards his forehead; his hair appears
darker, unkempt, wilder. Then, as he addresses the
senator, he sounds and acts like a different person.
Lecter.
Tell me, senator: did you nurse Catherine yourself?
Senator Martin.
What?
Lecter.
Did you breast-feed her?
Senator Martin.
Yes. I did.
Lecter.
Toughened your nipples, didn't it? ... Amputate a
man's leg and he can still feel it tickling. Tell
me, mom: when your little girl is on the slab,
where will it tickle you?
Senator Martin.
Take this thing back to Baltimore.
Lecter.
Oh, and senator, just one more thing: love your
suit.
Lecter, perceived by his culture as a psychopath who needs
to be concealed and robbed of identity, Lecter acts
accordingly; the mask alters him. In a year in which we
finally have seen the face of a "mad bomber," this way of
coping with the incomprehensible seems in need of cultural
scrutiny. Does labeling one "insane," like the placing of
a mask, further "insanity?"
To return to Starling's journey, it may seem
initially that Lecter's anagrsunatic clues are a way of
selfishly toying with her. Rather, this is Lecter's way
of intricately assisting with Starling's transformation.
Turner and van Gennep remind us that the rite of passage
is, in its own way, a life crisis. Throughout mythology,
we see that the transformation and passage are also
treated as crisis, as is the power of the wound. In the
story of the Fisher King, for example, the young king
finds hot salmon at a campsite; he tries to hold it, but
it burns his skin and is dropped. The scar from his wound
will remain with him: his first contact with what will
later become his redemption -- as well as his primary
experience of real consciousness — comes immediately in
the form of a wound. If we are not cast out of the Garden
of Eden, there can be no experience of Holy Jerusalem.
We learn, through Lecter's quid pro quo with
Starling, that she suffered trauma as a young girl through
the deaths of her mother, and, more critically, her
father. She is a wounded woman; Lecter, "psychopath" or
not, remains a brilliant psychiatrist who clearly
recognizes the need in us all to cope with our wounds.
Myth teaches us that these wounds will never fully heal;
rather, they and their scars offer us a graduation from a
naive consciousness into a more meaningful consciousness
of self.
Before Lecter even begins to probe Starling's past
-- and hence, before her true journey has begun -- he
sends her to his storage facility. She reaches "Your Self
Storage" late at night, and attempts to enter the building
with the business's owner; without a key or time to wait
for morning. Starling realizes that she must fight her way
into the space -- again, crossing a literal threshold.
Using a car jack to raise the door a short distance above
the ground, she dirties herself by lying in the dirt and
attempting to crawl underneath the tremendous metal door
which, she acknowledges, could fall and crush her in an
instant. Forcing herself into the darkness proves
difficult indeed, as she hears the ripping of fabric and
feels a flash of pain; glancing down, she sees that a nail
has torn into the flesh of her leg, leaving a substantial
spot of her own blood. She touches the wound with her
fingers, crawling through the dirt — the "ashes" of myth
— to reach into the blackness of her "Self." In this
exploration of self. Starling has been wounded, and hence
has moved to a new level of consciousness. And it is
Lecter -- the dark teacher of Native American stories --
that brought her here. It is no coincidence that the
first object she sees within the storage unit is a stuffed
owl with its wings spread wide as if to attack: a symbol
of death in many Native American cultures, the owl reminds
us that this journey into the self will be fraught with
menace..-but like the owl, we must attempt to fly. For
Starling, there is little hesitation; again, wounded, she
does what she must do: she proceeds into the storage
shed, separated from the outside by a huge wall of steel,
thus beginning her own transformation.
The next and, arguably, most important threshold
Starling crosses comes near the film's conclusion.
Throughout the story, she has gradually revealed details
to Lecter about the death of her father. These
revelations do not, incidentally, need to be pried out of
her; "I tell you things, you tell me things," Lecter says
to her. "Not about this case, though. About yourself.
Quid pro quo. Yes or no. Yes or no? Little Catherine is
waiting." Starling's response is played by Ms. Foster as
a refusal to show hesitation, even if it exists in the
soul. She knows that Catherine Martin will surely die if
she does not follow him, and so she has no choice. Her
eyes do not move from his as she responds simply: "Go,
Doctor." He does so, enabling Starling to begin to cope
with her own emotional and psychological wounds.
The final pieces of her story are told after Lecter
has been transferred to Tennessee. He knows at this point
that she and Crawford lied to him about a potential
transfer to an island facility; unlike Chilton, however,
he does not seem to take this personally. He acknowledges
her use of the name "Anthrax Island" as being "a nice
touch," and, when Starling begs him to continue telling
the truth about Buffalo Bill to her in order that she may
rescue Catherine Martin, he again picks up his line of
inquiry- Through this questioning, we learn about
Starling's failed attempt to save a family of screaming
lambs from slaughter. In telling her story to Lecter, she
makes meaning of her past and this event. "Meaning,"
Turner writes, "always involves retrospection and
reflexivity, a past, a history. Meaning is the only
category which grasps the part to the whole in life."^^
Starling here uses Bruner's concept of the narrative to
literally create an act of meaning:
For one of the most powerful forms of social
stability ... is the human propensity to share
stories of human diversity and to make their
interpretations congruent with the divergent moral
commitments and institutional obligations that
prevail in every culture.^®
Demme understands what is actively happening to
Starling. Lecter sits behind the steel bars of a cell as
they begin their final "telling of stories." The camera
switches between individual shots of Starling and Lecter,
and we see that it is steadily moving closer to each of
them, filling the screen with her story and his questions.
Starling tells him that she attempted to run away from a
cousin's ranch after the death of her father. "What set
you off, Clarice?" Lecter asks, and it is here that
Starling, immersed in the liminal, must actively face --
through story-telling -- the sound which has haunted her
for years and propelled her into the FBI: the sound of
lambs screaming while being butchered. Starling continues
the telling: unable to save all of the lambs, she
attempted to save one by running away, beginning her first
attempt at the journey. Lecter asks where she was going,
and she responds:
Starling.
I don't know...I didn't have any food, any
water...and it was very cold. Very cold...I
thought, I thought if I could save just one, but he
was so heavy...so heavy...I didn't get more than a
few miles when the sheriff's car picked me up. The
rancher was so angry he sent me to live at the
Lutheran orphanage at Bozeman. I never saw the
ranch again.
Lecter.
What became of your lamb, Clarice?
starling.
They killed it.
Lecter.
You still wake up sometimes, don't you? Wake up in
the dark and hear the screaming of the lambs.
starling.
Yes.
Lecter.
And you think if you save poor Catherine, you could
make them stop, don't you? You think if Catherine
lives, you won't wake up in the dark ever again to
hear that awful screaming of the lambs...
starling.
I don't know... I don't know.
Lecter, the hint of tears in his eyes, thanks her for her
work. His task is complete: he has used "the Socratic
method to instruct Clarice Starling in criminal behavior,
and manage[d] his protege's psychological exorcism with
the ease of a practiced demon hunter.During the
preceding dialogue, the camera has moved in to such tight
shots that there no longer seem to be bars surrounding
story-teller or listener. Through the telling, Starling
has been able to make meaning of this event, freeing
herself from her own prison.
Now, and only now, will Starling be able to
confront Jame Gumb. As she travels towards Belvedere, she
literally drives across a bridge -- Eliade's dangerous
threshold — to reach Gumb's lair. She is then literally
thrust into the blackness of Eliade's cosmic night, or the
belly of the monster. After confronting him in his
moderately-lit den, he flees downstairs; she follows, each
step taking her lower and into greater darkness. The
fluttering of moth wings and distorted music filling her
ears, and the immediate discovery of a decomposed woman
lying in a bathtub imprinted on her mind. Starling
suddenly finds herself completely blind as Gumb eliminates
all interior light and begins to stalk her. Wearing his
night-vision glasses, Gumb is thrust into power. For the
first time in the scene, we leave Starling's point of view
and take on Gumb's: Starling, her eyes wide and rigid with
terror, stumbles throughout his tomb-like basement; Giomb,
moving slowly, closes in on her reaches out to touch her
hair, pulling away before making contact. Living in the
darkest and most immediate version of Eliade's concept of
the "bush," Starling knows that she could easily be killed
at any moment, and yet she does not beg, plead, or try to
run: she relies on herself and the senses she has left.
When the click of Gumb preparing his weapon to fire fills
the room, her ears -- close to never again hearing the
screaming of the lambs -- discern the sound, activating
her to move to face it, fire, and survive. She has
crossed the bridge and descended into the pit to save
Catherine Martin and herself. "The process of filling her
terrible emptiness," writes Kathleen Murphy, "of silencing
the lambs for good, is [truly] completed only when.
through Starling's heroic descent into an actual hell, the
real child in Jame Gumb' s dark pit is released
Starling, having lived through each stage in the rite of
passage, is transformed; and, while we see her graduating
from the FBI academy in the film's conclusion (thus
completing the reintegration phase), her life passage
finds that she has earned something far more significant
than an FBI badge: the silence, and not the screaming, of
the lambs.
Conclusions
"I'm having an old friend for dinner."
Hannibal Lecter
An analysis of a film as rich as The Silence of the
Lambs could go on for an interminable length of time; in
fact, Roger Ebert has written about his experiences during
a weekend seminar on the film: frame by frame, the film is
studied, discussed, and made meaningful. It does seem
surprising initially, though, to have a thriller win such
accolades. One expects certain films to have more meaning
than others: Ordinary People, for example, is more easily
called life-changing. But perhaps therein lies the genius
in Demme's film: "mercilessly scary and mercifully
humane," it has taken exceptionally unpleasant subject
matter and a generally disreputable genre, using an
intricate understanding of rites of passage, storytelling,
meaning, and culture, to create a film of terror but not
gratuitous violence; a film in which the canonical is
challenged, forcing us to look twice before judging
another human being (artist, "criminal," or "psychopath")
as "mad"; a film in which the human drama supersedes and
propels the plot instead of falling victim to it.
But did anyone really get it?
The Silence of the Lambs won five academy awards in
1991, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best
Adapted Screenplay. But did those who cast their ballots
for the film see it as just a marvelously constructed and
performed story? Or did they go beyond the story, into
the depths of questioning which we have just accomplished?
Obviously, we will never know, but a part of me believes
that, as Bruner insists that we use stories and narratives
to make meaning within our lives, part of the depth of
this intricate and precise story perhaps did make it into
the thought-processes of more in its audience than might
be expected. A brilliant work of art is a brilliant work
of art, and the film's critical and financial success
leads me to hope that Demme's fleshing out (if you will)
of a genre known for producing mere "entertainment" did
reach more people in a meaningful way than, say, an
excellent but neglected exhibit at a small-town museum.
I want to clarify here that I am not suggesting
that Demme and the film are asking us to release all
serial killers from confinement and gather the family
around the television to watch the life-affirming Silence
of the Lambs. Rather, I maintain that Demme works with
the images and realities of and within America to tell his
story -- while dealing with rites of passage and
addressing a number of subtle dilemmas within our culture.
We in America are so intent upon denying darkness that we
can create individuals who eventually must act out in
horrifying ways. Perhaps, the film argues, if we had in
place these Native American rituals which embrace the
darkness in order to understand it, we might not
experience as much violent crime...and possibly not need a
Hannibal Lecter to guide us on our ovm journeys.
In "Literature as Equipment for Living," Kenneth
Burke writes that proverbs fall into many different
categories which suggest the "active nature" inherent
within them. Proverbs console; chart; foretell; show us
how to live wisely; instruct. Somehow, we feel that
they understand. And, as Burke extends this analysis from
proverbs to encompass the whole field of literature,
perhaps we should look more often for this "active nature"
in places previously unexplored: where we might not expect
to find anything more than a good laugh, a simple
distraction, or a scare. For when a carefully constructed
work of art -- our "equipment for living" -- comes along,
we must look at it more closely than we might be
immediately inclined. A close look could produce insights
about us and our culture; perhaps, then, there is a
greater potential to change our culture and our lives
through theatre, film, poetry, fiction, and art than we
ever imagined. If we accept that the work of art can
intimately possess an understanding of the ways in which
we live our lives, perhaps then we can truly begin to seek
out and perceive clues within it as to how to make meaning
out of and survive our own dramas...and set into motion
true cultural change.
And isn't that what art within a culture should
accomplish?
endnotes
1. Peter Travers, "Snapshots from Hell," Rolling Stone (March 7th, 1991): 88.
2. Lisa Kennedy, "Writers on the Lamb," The Village Voice (March 5, 1991);
49-59.
3. Kenneth Burke, The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in Symbolic Action
(Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press, 1941), 304.
4. Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: BasicBooks,
1973), 5.
5. Geertz, 17.
6. Jerome Bruner, Acts of Meaning (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1990), 34.
7. Bruner, 39.
8. Bruner, 47.
9. Bruner, 43-44.
10. Arnold van Gennep, Rites of Passage, trans. Monika B. Vizedom and
Gabrielle L. Caffee (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960), 10.
11. Victor Turner, From Ritual to Theatre (New York: PAJ Publications,
1982), 24.
12. Turner, 24.
13. van Gennep, 18.
14. van Gennep, 21.
15. Turner, 24.
16. Mircea Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion, trans.
Willard R. Trask (New York: Harper & Row, 1961), 8.
17. Eliade, 9.
18. Eliade, 11.
19. Eliade, 12.
20. Eliade, 12.
21. Eliade, 21.
22. Eliade, 63.
43.
44.
45.
46. Eliade, 181.
Jonathan Demme, "Identity Check; Interview with Jonathan Demme,"
interview by Gavin Smith, Film Comment (Jan-Feb 1991): 37.
The Silence of the Lambs, dir. Jonathan Demme, with Jodie Foster,
Anthony Hopkins, and Scott Glenn. Orion, 1990. All remaining quotes
from the film are from this source.
Julie Tharp, "The Transvestite as Monster; Gender Horror in The Silence of
the Lambs and Psycho," Journal of Popular Film and Television
(February 1991), 109.
Turner, 28.
Bruner, 42.
Demme interview. Film Comment, 37.
Geertz, 24.
Geertz, 22.
Geertz, 24.
Gavin Smith, "Identity Check," Film Comment (Jan-Feb '91): 37.
Jeanne Silverthorne, "The Cave," Artforum (March 1991); 18.
Turner, 25.
Turner, 28.
Turner, 41.
Turner, 83-84.
Turner, 26.
Turner, 27
Turner, 80-81.
Demme interview, 37.
Turner, 69.
Turner, 10.
Turner, 70.
Turner, 10.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71. Turner, 10.
Eliade, 189.
Turner, 26.
Eliade, 189.
Eliade, 180.
Travers, 88.
Eliade, 191-192.
Smith, 29.
Turner, 25.
Turner, 30.
Frederick Buechner, Listening to Your Life (San Francisco: Harper Collins,
1992), 113.
Elayne Rapping, "The Uses of Violence," The Progressive (August 1991):
Rapping, 37.
Turner, 46.
Kathleen Murphy, "Communion," Film Comment (Jan-Feb 1991); 31.
Turner, 77.
Silverthorne, 19.
Travers, 89.
Demme interview, 37.
Turner, 47.
Turner, 77.
Bruner, 68.
Murphy, 32.
Murphy, 32.
Burke, 294-295.
