Silence_of_Lambs_Essay
In repo

The Silence of the LambsBy Amy TaubinESSAYS—JUL 14, 1998
ASHAREdirector who knows his genres, Jonathan Demme has never been able toresist turning them inside out. Starting in the ﬁlm industry as a publicist,Demme was soon hired by Roger Corman as a scriptwriter and then as adirector. Corman’s rules for ﬁlmmaking—which mandate either the revelationof some bit of bare torso or some show of physical violence for every threepages of dialogue—are as good a lesson in the misogynist aspect of voyeurism asLaura Mulvey’s pioneer essay “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema” (1975)and the ﬂood of feminist ﬁlm theory that followed it. Caged Heat (1974),Demme’s ﬁrst directing eﬀort for Corman, is a woman-in-prison ﬂick thatsuggests that early on he was aware of the connection between genre bends andgender twists—the connection that is stunningly realized inThe Silence of the Lambs.As exhilarating as it is harrowing, The Silence of the Lambs is a slasher ﬁlm inwhich the woman is hero rather than victim, pursuer rather than pursued. Theﬁlm has two complex characters: the ﬂedgling FBI agent Clarice Starling (JodieFoster), and Dr. Hannibal Lecter (performed with cobralike relish by AnthonyHopkins). Starling has been chosen by her boss Jack Crawford (Scott Glenn) fora special task: to ﬁnd a serial killer nicknamed “Buﬀalo Bill,” who is murderingwomen and doing something terrible with their skin.Crawford believes that the deranged psychiatrist and psychopath Lecter, whoseferocious oral impulses ﬁnd their release in language and, less acceptably, inhuman ﬂesh, may know the killer’s identity. Since Crawford has helped toconﬁne Lecter for life in a hospital for the criminally insane, he doubts that thedoctor will have much interest in helping him. He decides to use Clarice as alure, sending her oﬀ to Lecter armed with a fake survey questionnaire. If Lecteris intrigued by Clarice, he won’t be able to resist playing the omniscient analyst—leaking clues. And if Clarice is really lucky, Lecter might even tell her what todo.Faithful to the plot and incident of Thomas Harris’ best seller, Demme shifts itstone and meaning. The ﬁlm makes Clarice even more central—and moreisolated—than she was in the novel. As Foster plays her, she’s remote in a waythat signals something more complex than a novice’s attempt at a professionalattitude. Demme shoots the scenes between Lecter and Clarice in extremeclose-up, shot-countershot, with the actors looking directly into the camera.You can see the tension in Clarice’s face, her concentrated struggle not only toget the information she needs from Lecter, but also to avoid being overwhelmedby him—to maintain her separation from him.And to get it right. And to do it all herself. When Lecter points out herlimitations and failures, she feels ashamed and angry. But it’s because she hasn’tlived up to her own expectations, not because he thinks less of her.In terms of the frightening Grimm’s fairy-tale world that Demme’s imagerysuggests (and Lecter’s locutions zing home), Clarice’s mission is not to marrythe prince but to rescue the maiden. On that reversal, her identity rests. It’s alsowhat fascinates Lecter and wins him to her cause: unlike most heroes of eithersex, she’s more moved by vulnerability than she is attracted to power.Amazingly ﬂuid, The Silence of the Lambs shifts back and forth from Gothicfantasy to police procedural drama. Demme knows how to map psyche andhistory onto landscape and objects. The ﬁlm is packed with 300 years of relicsof white America. Every time Lecter sends Clarice on a treasure hunt, she ﬁndsa ﬂag or two tucked away with the rusty riﬂes, dressmakers’ dummies, and theodd severed head preserved in a jar. Detective stories and psychoanalysis bothinvestigate traumas of the past. Here the two (Clarice’s search for Buﬀalo Billand Lecter’s unorthodox analysis of Clarice) are mixed against a background ofgovernment buildings, chicken farms, and lonely airports where everyone iswalking around looking bewildered—as if they’d just noticed that they’d losteverything.Near the end of the ﬁlm, the camera lingers for a moment on a medium shot ofa child’s-size American ﬂag leaning against a dusty army helmet and then cutsto a close-up of a sea-blue paper mobile with a butterﬂy design—a bit ofChinatown decoration or a trophy from Vietnam, Bill’s inheritance and hislegacy. And this is why the ﬁnal image is more disturbing than anything that hascome before: the serial killer becomes an American gift to the world, afragmentation bomb, ready to explode.View Comments (0)Amy Taubin wrote regularly about movies for the Village Voice for ﬁfteen yearsand for Artforum and Film Comment even longer. She lives and still writes a lot inNew York City.
MORE: ESSAYS
Hud: No Place for HeroesA career-altering artisticbreakthrough for director MartinRitt, this dark tale of a family’sdownfall daringly exposes themythology of the western hero asempty and morally bankrupt.By Gabriel MillerON FILM / ESSAYS — JUL 14, 2026
Alice Doesn’t Live HereAnymore: At Home in theWorldMade in close collaboration with itsstar, Ellen Burstyn, MartinScorsese’s ﬁrst ﬁlm for a majorstudio is a warm, openheartedportrait of a woman who endeavorsa drastic reshaping of her life.By Stephanie ZacharekON FILM / ESSAYS — JUL 14, 2026
The Crying Game’s Legacyas TransgenderRepresentationThough it became the subject ofcultural hysteria upon its release in1992, Neil Jordan’s ﬁlm can beappreciated today as a rare andremarkably nuanced depiction of acisgender man and a trans womanfalling in love.By Willow Catelyn MaclayON FILM / ESSAYS — JUL 14, 2026
The Crying Game: IdentityCrisesNeil Jordan achieved majorinternational success with thiscomplex exploration of identity anddesire set against the turbulence ofthe Troubles in Northern Ireland.By Tasha RobinsonON FILM / ESSAYS — JUL 14, 2026
This website uses cookies to enhance user experienceand to analyze performance and traﬃc on ourwebsite.Learn MoreGOT IT!GOT IT!GOT IT!GOT IT!
