Sixth_Sense_review
In repo

Free Printable Chair YogaStart moving better at home. Download your free chair yoga guide today.Simple.Life Apps Inc.Learn More
ReviewsThe Sixth SenseDRAMA106 minutes ‧ PG-13‧ 1999Roger EbertAugust 6, 19994 min read
“The Sixth Sense” isn’t a thriller in the modern sense, butmore of a ghost story of the sort that flourished years ago,when ordinary people glimpsed hidden dimensions. It haslong been believed that children are better than adults atseeing ghosts; the barriers of skepticism and disbelief arenot yet in place. In this film, a small boy solemnly tells hispsychologist, “I see dead people. They want me to dothings for them.” He seems to be correct.The psychologist is Malcolm Crowe (Bruce Willis), who is shot one night in his home by an intruder, aman who had been his patient years earlier and believes he was wrongly treated. The man then turnsthe gun on himself. “The next fall,” as the subtitles tell us, we see Crowe mended in body but perhapsnot in spirit, as he takes on a new case, a boy named Cole Sear (Haley Joel Osment) who exhibits someof the same problems as the patient who shot at him. Maybe this time he can get it right.The film shows us things adults do not see. When Cole’s mother (Toni Collette) leaves the kitchen forjust a second and comes back in the room, all of the doors and drawers are open. At school, he tells histeacher “they used to hang people here.” When the teacher wonders how Cole could possibly knowthings like that, he helpfully tells him, “when you were a boy they called you Stuttering Stanley.” It isCrowe’s task to reach this boy and heal him, if healing is indeed what he needs. Perhaps he is calling forhelp; he knows the Latin for “from out of the depths I cry into you, oh Lord!” Crowe doesn’t necessarilybelieve the boy’s stories, but Crowe himself is suffering, in part because his wife, once so close, nowseems to be drifting into an affair and doesn’t seem to hear him when he talks to her. The boy tells him,“talk to her when she’s asleep. That’s when she’ll hear you.” Using an “as if” approach to therapy, Croweasks Cole, “What do you think the dead people are trying to tell you?” This is an excellent question,seldom asked in ghost stories, where the heroes are usually so egocentric they think the ghosts havegone to all the trouble of appearing simply so they can see them. Cole has some ideas. Crowe wonderswhether the ideas aren’t sound even if there aren’t really ghosts.Bruce Willis often finds himself in fantasies and science fiction films. Perhaps he fits easily into thembecause he is so down to earth. He rarely seems ridiculous, even when everything else in the screen isabsurd (see “Armageddon“), because he never over-reaches; he usually plays his characters flat andmatter of fact. Here there is a poignancy in his bewilderment. The film opens with the mayor presentinghim with a citation, and that moment precisely marks the beginning of his professional decline. He goesdown with a sort of doomed dignity.Haley Joel Osment, his young co-star, is a very good actor in a film where his character possibly hasmore lines than anyone else. He’s in most of the scenes, and he has to act in them–this isn’t a role for acute kid who can stand there and look solemn in reaction shots. There are fairly involved dialoguepassages between Willis and Osment that require good timing, reactions and the ability to listen.Osment is more than equal to them. And although the tendency is to notice how good he is, not everyadult actor can play heavy dramatic scenes with a kid and not seem to condescend (or, even worse, to besubtly coaching and leading him). Willis can. Those scenes give the movie its weight and make it asconvincing as, under the circumstances, it can possibly be.I have to admit I was blind-sided by the ending. The solution to many of the film’s puzzlements is rightthere in plain view, and the movie hasn’t cheated, but the very boldness of the storytelling carried meright past the crucial hints and right through to the end of the film, where everything takes on anintriguing new dimension. The film was written and directed by M. Night Shyamalan, whose previousfilm, “Wide Awake,” was also about a little boy with a supernatural touch; he mourned his deadgrandfather, and demanded an explanation from God. I didn’t think that one worked. “The Sixth Sense”has a kind of calm, sneaky self-confidence that allows it to take us down a strange path, intriguingly.
Now streaming on:
Rent
Rent
Rent
Rent
RentPowered byRoger EbertRoger Ebert was the film critic of the Chicago Sun-Times from 1967 until his death in 2013. In1975, he won the Pulitzer Prize for distinguished criticism.The Sixth SenseDRAMA106 minutes ‧ PG-13‧ 1999
CastToni Collette as Lynn SearHaley Joel Osment as Cole SearBruce Willis as Malcolm CroweOlivia Williams as Anna CroweDonnie Wahlberg as Vincent GrayW ritten and Directed byN. Night Shyamalan
Leave a comment
Log in™Toni ColletteHaley Joel OsmentDonnie WahlbergBruce Willis5
FEATURED VIDEOSFEATURED VIDEOSFEATURED VIDEOSFEATURED VIDEOSPowered by
Now playing
Matt Zoller SeitzBrian TallericoRichard RoeperGlenn KennyLatest articles
CHAZ'S JOURNALLess than an hour agoFESTIVALS & AWARDS6 hours agoFESTIVALS & AWARDS1 day agoFESTIVALS & AWARDS1 day ago
NHS Scotland app will make ‘huge differe…
The OdysseyLucky (2026)The W estiesThe Isolate Thief
Celebrating the Life of George E.Johnson, Sr. (1927-2026)MUBI Fest 2026: Better T ogetherKVIFF 2026: Fruit Gathering,Incinerator, 3 W eeks AfterKVIFF 2026: W rap-up andA wardsSIGNUPSearch Keywords...MOVIE REVIEWSGREAT MOVIESTV/STREAMINGINTERVIEWSCOLLECTIONSBLACK WRITERS WEEKCONTRIBUTORS
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
