The Director of Fear | The New Yorker
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2002/08/12/the-director-of-fear

Save this story
Save this story
Save this story
Save this story
This week in the magazine and here online (see The Critics), Anthony Lane reviews M. Night Shyamalan's new film, "Signs." In this interview, from the 2001 New Yorker Festival, the
New Yorker
film critic David Denby talks with Shyamalan about his earlier films, including "The Sixth Sense" and "Unbreakable," and about what makes movies scary.
DAVID DENBY: Tonight's guest is M. Night Shyamalan, whose films many of you have seen. One of the miseries of going through movies in this period is the disappearance of what we used to call a director's signature. So many of the younger directors seem to come out of television or MTV, and so they don't develop a personal style. Now you couldn't see a single frame of Night's "The Sixth Sense" or "Unbreakable" and confuse them with anybody else's movies. Among other things, Shyamalan has managed to make poetry out of the city of Philadelphia, which some of us might not have thought possible. And the great thing, it seems to me, is that you're doing this not as a little independent filmmaker but in a big-money Hollywood atmosphere, and have managed to come out with your own style almost right at the beginning of your career. I know that when the script of "Sixth Sense" was circulating around and a lot of people liked it, you held out to direct. Is that right? Was the thought that you didn't want anyone else to lay his hands on it?
M. NIGHT SHYAMALAN: Well, for most people, I suppose, the career began with "The Sixth Sense," but . . .
There were others.
There was a lot before that. And it all built up to the moment when I finished this screenplay, and I basically said, "I know how good it is, and I'm not going to let anybody else tell me, and what's going to happen is that I'm going to direct it, and that's all there is to it." And basically we went to all the studios. I started doing something that I still do: I don't tell anybody anything about the project prior to their sitting down and opening the first page—I don't sell it in any way at all. I do that now at kind of a ridiculous level, where Disney bought the new movie, with a price tag on it, without knowing what it was. Originally, though, it was intended to let the artifice come out of the process. So we would call and say, "On September 15th, on Monday morning, we're going to give you his new screenplay, and he's going to direct it, and the minimum bid's a million." That's how "Sixth Sense" went in. And they said, "What's it about?," and the agent said, "I don't know." And that was the truth—they didn't know. And that was basically to say, "No bullshit, please." And if they hear truth in the voice—you know, not like I'm selling myself but I honestly believe in this screenplay. I dare you not to read it. And it was that dare that caused everybody to read it instantly. But that all came about because of the lessons learned from other projects that went before it. I had directed two movies, little movies, before that. The first one made nineteen thousand dollars, the second one made, I think, two hundred and forty thousand dollars. And then the next two made almost a billion.
It was said of Hitchcock that he saw the movie in his head before he started shooting, and, of course, he would—his original training was as a graphic artist, and he used to draw everything out. You don't draw, but you do work with a storyboard guy. How does that work?
I work with Brick Mason. He was responsible for the two-hundred-and-forty-thousand-dollar disaster. That's when we first got together.
Explain how that relationship works.
Well, it started on "Wide Awake." I didn't know him, and I guess he was just trying to make some extra cash. This young filmmaker came in to do this movie, with a shot list that I gave him at the time—you know, mid shot, wide shot, scene of two kids—and he just basically drew it up. That's not how we work at all now. Now we sit down and basically make the whole movie—we make the whole thing right then and there, in the room, and it takes us months and months to do it. I'm from Spielberg-land, and he's from something like Iranian-black-and-white-filmmaking-land, and so the two of us together have a nice mixture; we kind of represent the opposite sides of each other.
So it's essentially planned out shot by shot, cut by cut, before a single foot of film is shot.
Right. You know, "Unbreakable," the whole movie, is four hundred cuts. If you watch something like a Michael Bay scene, one five-minute scene would probably have four hundred cuts in it. It's an amazing thing: when we storyboarded "Unbreakable," we counted up the cuts, because we realized how little we were cutting, and it was around four hundred, and the final film ended up being around four hundred.
Now, what happens when you get on the set? Do you stick to this plan absolutely, or do you discover new things, or throw out the drawings?
You know, we come from a very organic place, we come from the characters' feelings. And so when I sit down with a superstar actor or something and we do the scene—and it's basically in the back of your head, the whole scene—and he says, "Where's the camera?," and I say, "It's back there," his instinct will be "What are you talking about?," you know, "Why?" And then I will sit down and explain to him with absolute certainty and clarity why that's there and why it's emotionally correct for his character, and then I'll say to him, "If you have a better idea to convey your sense of loneliness in this scene, I'll do it." And then there'll be a moment of silence, and he'll say, "No, it's cool, let's do it."
Well, you got two very internalized performances out of Bruce Willis. I guess I knew he could do that from a small movie he made years ago, called "In Country," from the Bobbie Ann Mason novel. But was he bored with doing things like "Die Hard"? Did he want to calm down a little bit and do something that was more interior?
I think you catch people at different times, and different actors are different—you can only express who you are, and he was at a perfect place when I met him. He wanted to move on, he had grown up and wanted to do something else, and for me it was nice to have very emotional pieces of dialogue or very dramatic stuff said by an Everyman, a bartender, rather than, let's say, an actor like Jeremy Irons. He could have been the psychologist in "The Sixth Sense." That would have been more straightforward in some sense, but not as accessible in other senses. I wanted as much of an Everyman as I could get, a rough guy.
I didn't mean to be putting down his performances in the "Die Hard" movies, by the way, because I think that he does all kinds of comic inflection within that action framework that makes the performances very lively and very engaging. Now, when you're conceiving the screenplay, are you also thinking of specific actors? Was it Bruce all the way, and Sam Jackson all the way, in "Unbreakable"?
It's become that. I don't know why I do that. On this one that I just finished and sold, called "Signs," there was a group of three actors that just came to me. One big actor and two others. As it turns out, I got one of those three actors in the movie.
But if you didn't get the actor you wanted would you have to reconceive the screenplay elements?
No. I mean, I would if it drastically went the other way. For example, if I did hire Jeremy Irons, I'd probably work really hard to bring in more humor, and some more physicality, because Bruce brings with him physicality, so he doesn't have to do anything and everybody feels like they saw something physical. It's different if you see Bruce sitting down in a chair as opposed to Jeremy sitting down in a chair.
You've got a handle on things, and you're doing it from—I'm going to mispronounce it—Conshohocken, Pennsylvania.
Well, my offices are in Conshohocken, right.
But this is big Hollywood stuff we're talking about, with enormous grosses and large budgets now. Do you want that distance from Los Angeles?
Well, what I found out early was that the reason that my scripts came out of the pile on the desk is because they had a different flavor to them. They weren't coming from the same gene pool as everyone else, and when I realized that I became aware that I needed to protect it. I was an Indian kid who grew up in a white suburb, and who loved Spielberg, and who went to Catholic school but is really Hindu. Maybe that's a pretty interesting point of view. Not many people have that.
Let's unpack some of that. Your parents were settled here and then went back to India when you were born? They wanted you to be born there?
Right. They wanted to have me in India.
What was the emotional significance of that?
They're just very proud of being Indian, and they had to give up their citizenship recently because of estate laws and all that junk. That was a very emotional thing for them.
So you were raised as a Hindu, but you wound up in a Catholic school when you were how old?
Ten.
And was that just because the Catholic school was the best school in town, or how did that happen?
Discipline, I think. It matched the Indian ethic of discipline.
Do you consider yourself a Hindu or a Catholic or . . .
I've gotten so much of all these different religions over time that I think the parts that are common to all of them are the things that have stuck with me.
There's a spiritual element in your movies, a sense that your heroes are suffering heroes, that they have a soul, and that goodness is a very positive force in this world. Is there a religious root to that, or is it just your sense of how the world works?
Well, it's not been conscious, because until I sit down and write I'm about as far away from spirituality as you can think. You know, I'm a bacon-cheeseburger-eating, basketball-watching guy. Then I sit down and suddenly people are having epiphanies, and God's coming to them—I don't know what that's all about. You'd be a better one to tell us what that's all about.
I don't know where it's coming from, either. Talk about Philadelphia a little bit. It's a sombre city in your movies. It's dark, it rains a lot, there's a kind of blue-gray tonality in "Unbreakable" and a brownish one, I remember, in "Sixth Sense." Does this represent your child's sense of the city, or is it something that came later?
Well, it's just a great city for me, because it's a very large city but it feels small, and it has such history. Philadelphia has its history on its sleeve, with the buildings and the little plaque that says that Benjamin Franklin stood here. Spending time there, you start to feel that we had the first hot dog, the first ice cream, the first hospital, the first everything.
Is it possible that a filmmaking community will grow up around you the way it has in Northern California around Lucas and Coppola?
I think if there was one more filmmaker in the city it would, because crews could work all the time—basically going from my film to another person's film.
And now do you hire people from New York?
Philly, New York, Baltimore. Right now, there's not enough work to live in Philadelphia and just make films. So if there were two or three of us working there I think that a whole community could start.
When you read about the golden era of the early seventies, one of the things that comes through is that these guys got together a lot—they were all friends, and they hadn't quite made it as big as they became. Do you miss that kind of camaraderie?
Oh, I miss it a lot. I read all about that stuff, about the seventies, just to pretend that I have that. I call those same guys that they're writing about now, and I talk to them, thinking that I can residually be a part of that group, that I can be the rookie in that group. But it's not like that. I went to dinner last night with Ang Lee, and there's really a sense that we don't know anybody else. Maybe it's because we're both Asian—we go back home and just do our thing.
You're both very close to your families. And the family theme in his movies and yours is one thing that connects them. The father-son or the surrogate father-son connection is very powerful in both of your two later movies.
In the new one, too.
Do you want to go into the autobiographical roots of that? I know you have a powerful father.
He's a doctor. Everybody in my family is a doctor. As for my relationship with my father, I think the twelve-year-old period was a big time period. I can't not write it. With "Unbreakable," I just forced my hand not to write the version of the movie in which a ten-year-old boy thinks his dad is Superman, and one kid is right. That was the version of the movie that came so easily. I could write that in, like, a few weeks. Instead, I forced myself to do it from the adult perspective of a man realizing that he might be a real-life Superman.
Could I extend that into a metaphor for anyone who has unrealized powers and is afraid to exercise them? Because that was one way for me into the movie, of all the things that I might do if I just had a little less fear.
Right.
Fear of hurting other people, fear of hurting myself.
Definitely. What is our potential? And it was also coming from the time right after "Sixth Sense," when everybody was going kind of crazy saying things about me. I wondered what would happen if all these amazing things were true. And, for that matter, what if they were wrong, and it was only luck.
You've got one character who is completely invulnerable and another character who is completely vulnerable, and that's the tie between them. Have you ever felt completely vulnerable in the way that the Sam Jackson guy does every day?
Oh, definitely, definitely. I'm going to go to a sports metaphor now. You know, when I play basketball, there are always two characters that come out in me. One is invincible. There's nothing you can do to stop him. Most often, though, it's that little kid. I'm definitely going to lose, I'm going to get hurt, and all that.
A lot of people were scared by "The Sixth Sense," and also by "Unbreakable." Another part of your signature is a sense of something that's foreboding, something hidden within the atmosphere, something that's going to come out. Do you enjoy the sensation of being scared in movies?
Freddie Krueger with the blood—that doesn't really scare me. What scares me is something like this: if I had a photo of my wife on my desk, and it was face down, and I put it up and I walked out of the room and I came back and it was face down again. That's scary.
The reason I asked you about whether you enjoy being scared was that Brian De Palma once told me—I guess it was after he made "Carrie"—that he hated being scared, and therefore he made a few scary movies in order to control that, and to manipulate other people.
Well, "The Exorcist" is one of my favorite movies, and I have a poster of it in my house.
Let's talk about children as actors. I talked to Haley Joel Osment on the telephone, and I've never spoken to a more intelligent eleven-year-old kid in my life. It must have been a delight to work with him.
Yeah. He's probably prodigy intelligent, but that's not really what it is. He's a genius in emotional I.Q. And that's why he's going to be a great actor as long as he wants to be. On "Wide Awake," I'd have to tell the little kid, if he had to act scared, "Pretend you have to go to the bathroom. How do you act when you have to go to the bathroom?" The face that he makes, that's fear. That's the level of how the directing goes. And sometimes you've got to do that. But with Haley you talk about, "Tell me some time when you were really scared," then he'll talk about it, when his sister did something to him, or whatever. And it's for real. And then, at a certain point, he just really becomes that character.
He seemed to me so mentally active, though, that I wondered, great an actor as he is, whether acting would be enough for him—whether he wouldn't burst the bonds and want to direct and write and run for President.
Probably. I think that the moment when, or if, he grows up and he is not cute, and he goes through that awkward stage, and the world says, "We don't want to watch you anymore," he'll be able to deal with that and still have a love for this industry. Or maybe he won't, and he'll reject it.
Back to fear. I think Freud said, in his essay on the uncanny, that what produced that emotion was the return of something that you had repressed. Now, I don't know if that fits your movies or not, but you could say that ghosts represent our fear of death, and a repressed fear of death. Do you have any sense of any one particular thing that is frightening, that's lurking out there?
In my childhood, I was definitely scared all the time. My imagination was crazy. They couldn't even leave me alone in the house until I was about fourteen or fifteen.
You were fearful?
I was really paranoid about being alone, and all that. It would just be crazy. We came home one day from shopping in a mall, and I was probably ten or twelve—again, this image—and the front door was open. And it was nighttime, and my dad was there—my dad, he's about five-eight, and you could just knock him over like this. So he goes and gets our dog, who wouldn't attack anybody on the planet. He goes to the garage, gets our dog, and goes into the house, and he comes out, and no one was in there. I was just terrified sitting there. He says, "What I was scared about was that there would be some mental patient sitting on the edge of the bed, waiting in there." And that was basically what happened in "The Sixth Sense." If you're a ten-year-old with those images, you either go loony or you make a movie like "The Sixth Sense."
The element here that's most striking is that you keep it real in the movies themselves. You don't have a lot of silly stuff going on. Like those corridors in "The Sixth Sense," with the mother and son at home, they weren't weird-looking in any way, but strange things happened there.
Well, my hallways didn't have blue lights with fans turning, so I don't make my movies with blue lights and fans turning, you know?
What does grossing a billion dollars in two movies do to you, as a human being?
There are two different worlds. In the industry world, for good or bad, I'm at a place where I basically can do anything or ask anything of anybody in any studio and it'll get done, and that will last as long as I don't have "Lucky Numbers" or "Battleship Earth." But, you know, that's the way the industry is. It's very superficial. My movies make a ton of money, and that's why I basically call up and suggest an idea and they say it's great.
That's what I was trying to get at. Don't you have the fear that no one will talk straight to you anymore?
Well, I think that there's an assumption that I know what I'm talking about. What you really want to have is someone to question you all the time. I need everybody to do that, to say, "Yeah, that can work, but here's the problem with it." But the second part of this success is personal. It's not about the money so much as people feeling you're exceptional at something, and then it becomes that you're exceptional at everything. People ask me if they should divorce their wives. I don't know. I make movies. ♦
