M. Night Shyamalan Explains The Origin Of His Most Iconic Plot Twist: “It Flowered At That Moment”
https://screenrant.com/the-sixth-sense-movie-twist-origin-explained-m-night-shyamalan/

Hannah Gearan
Published
Aug 12, 2024, 9:44 AM EDT
Hannah Gearan (she/her) is has been writing for ScreenRant for over three years. Her deep cinema love traces back to age 11, when she equipped herself with a spiral-bound notebook, rated all the films she watched, and declared herself a critic. About a decade later, she received a BA from Wesleyan University, where she studied Film, Environmental Studies, and Writing. Hannah’s short film,
Toxic Faucets
, has screened at numerous film festivals, including the Independent Film Festival of Boston (IFFBoston). As a Movie News writer now, she draws upon her vast experience studying, making, and analyzing film as she approaches dynamic breaking stories.
ScreenRant
account
Summary
M. Night Shyamalan explains how the key twist ending for
The Sixth Sense
came about.
For Shyamalan, plot should from the characters, and in this case, it led him to creating one of his most iconic twists.
However, since
The Sixth Sense
, Shyamalan's legacy with twists has been criticized for favoring gimmicks.
M. Night Shyamalan discusses the origin of a key plot moment in
The Sixth Sense
. The third feature film from the director, it was released in 1999 and featured a leading cast including Bruce Willis, Haley Joel Osment, and Toni Collette. It was nominated for multiple Oscars, including Best Director and Best Original Screenplay for Shyamalan, and remains one of the director's most iconic works today.
The Sixth Sense
was also nominated for Oscars for Best Picture, Best Actor in a Supporting Role for Haley Joel Osment, Best Actress in a Supporting Role for Toni Collette, and Best Film Editing.
Speaking with
, Shyamalan details the origin of the key moment in
The Sixth Sense
The director described his process of writing the script, noting that he felt the film's initial script drafts just didn't "
have this extra gear
." In order to give the film more impact, he delved deeper into the characters, asking himself: "
A guy who is treating a boy who thinks he sees ghosts, what could happen from that?
" That is when it hit Shyamalan that the way to further explore "
life and death
" was to create the twist in the movie. Check out the full quote from Shyamalan below:
Plot should come out of character, at least I think that. A guy who is treating a boy who thinks he sees ghosts, what could happen from that? You know, how does he, how could this be surprising? Because the movie was very linear for me, and I was like 'this isn't, it doesn't have this extra gear, this movie.' When I was writing it, I was like, it's good it just doesn't have this extra gear.
And I was like 'well what could happen, this guy is treating someone that believes they see ghosts, what could happen, what could happen?' And then, you know, I sat up and I was like 'oh, you know, it's a deeper version of the conversation about life after death. And I kept thinking 'how can I go deeper into this subject,' and it kind of evolved outward and flowered at that moment. And so it was a very organic moment of just writing.
How The Sixth Sense Led To Shyamalan's Most Iconic Trait
The Twist Has Been Shyamalan's Greatest Strength And Weakness
Malcolm leans down to talk to Cole in The Sixth Sense
The Sixth Sense
ending twist
in question is, of course, when it is revealed that Willis' character, child psychologist Dr. Malcolm Crowe, is actually dead. Audiences had seen an attempt on Crowe's life in the early part of the movie, but it is later revealed that said attempt was actually successful, and thus Crowe has been dead the whole time. This twist vastly changes
The Sixth Sense
's supernatural implications, as it indicates that all of Cole's visions, including the lead character himself, are actually real, and the young boy does indeed "
see dead people
Audiences were stunned by this twist at the time of
The Sixth Sense
's release. From there, the twist ending became the quintessential element of
Shyamalan's movie career
, employed throughout the majority of his filmography. While the plot device was an effective tool for
The Sixth Sense
, the director's constant deployment of huge turns has sometimes received criticism for favoring gimmicks over plot coherence.
Because of
Shyamalan's legacy with the twist
, it is interesting to hear that
The Sixth Sense
's huge turn arose from the script's need for an extra push. At some level, Shyamalan was looking to grip the audiences with a degree of spectacle that would give the movie its "
extra gear
." For
The Sixth Sense
, Shyamalan properly achieved his goal at having that twist arise organically from the film's characters, but it is not a quality he has been able to equally capture across all of his films.
Source:
GQ / YouTube
8.8
/10
/10
The Sixth Sense
10 stars
9 stars
8 stars
7 stars
6 stars
5 stars
4 stars
3 stars
2 stars
1 star
Like
Follow
Followed
PG-13
Mystery
Thriller
Drama
Release Date
August 6, 1999
Runtime
107 minutes
Director
M. Night Shyamalan
Writers
M. Night Shyamalan
Producers
Barry Mendel, Frank Marshall, Kathleen Kennedy
Cast
See All
Bruce Willis
Malcolm Crowe
Haley Joel Osment
Cole Sear
Where to watch
Close
WHERE TO WATCH
RENT
BUY
The Sixth Sense follows child psychologist Malcolm Crowe as he tries to help Cole Sear, a troubled young boy who claims he can see and communicate with the dead. As Malcolm works to uncover the truth behind Cole's terrifying visions, he is drawn into a mystery that challenges everything he believes about life, loss, and redemption.
Studio(s)
Disney
Distributor(s)
Disney
, Dimension Films
Budget
$40 Million
Powered by
Expand
Collapse
Close
