The_Prestige-Academic
In repo

Journal of Religion & Film Journal of Religion & Film
Volume 14
Issue 1 April 2010 Article 7
4-1-2010
Man ’s Desir e Exceeds His Gr asp – The Pr estige as Ut opia Man ’s Desir e Exceeds His Gr asp – The Pr estige as Ut opia
Daniel Cojocaru
daniel.cojocaru@spc.o x.ac.uk
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f
Please tak e our f eedback sur vey at: https:/ /unomaha.az1.qualtrics.com/jf e/form/
SV_8cchtFmpDyGfBLE
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Cojocaru, Daniel (2010) "Man ’s Desir e Exceeds His Gr asp – The Pr estige as Ut opia, " Journal of Religion &
Film : Vol. 14: Iss. 1, Ar ticle 7.
DOI: https:/ /doi.or g/10.32873/uno.dc.jr f.14.01.07
Available at: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f/vol14/iss1/7
This Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y
DigitalCommons@UNO . It has been accepted for
inclusion in Journal of Religion & Film b y an authoriz ed
editor of DigitalCommons@UNO . For mor e information,
please contact unodigitalcommons@unomaha.edu .
Man ’s Desir e Exceeds His Gr asp – The Pr estige as Ut opia Man ’s Desir e Exceeds His Gr asp – The Pr estige as Ut opia
Abstr act Abstr act
This essa y intr oduces the Gir ardian model of conflictiv e imitation t o explain the riv alry between the two
main pr otagonists of The Pr estige , Alfr ed Bor den and Rober t Angier . Furthermor e it will be ar gued that the
protagonists ar e representativ es of two schools of ut opian thought. Finally , boundless desir e resulting
from conflictiv e imitation can be seen as the r eason for the failur e of Angier ’s pursuit of scientific ut opia
that consequently becomes a dyst opian r eality .
Creativ e Commons License Creativ e Commons License
This work is licensed under a Creativ e Commons A ttribution 4.0 License .
Author Notes Author Notes
PDF was par tially r emediated t o meet WCA G standar ds and r e-uploaded 4/30/2026
This ar ticle is a vailable in Journal of Religion & Film: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f/vol14/iss1/7
The weakness of all utopias is this, that they take the greatest difficulty of
man [i.e. original sin] and assume it to be overcome, and then give an elaborate
account of the overcoming of smaller ones. They first assume that no man will want
more than his share, and then are very ingenious in explaining whether his share
will be delivered by motor -car or balloon.1
The Prestige tells the story of the rivalry of two magicians, Alfred Borden
(played by Christian Bale) and Robert Angier (played by Hugh Jackman), in turn
of the century London. This rivalry can be understood as what Chesterton calls “the
greatest difficulty of man”, when one considers it in terms of René Girard’s mimetic
theory. In I See Satan Fall Like Lightning Girard uncovers the problem of human
desire in the Tenth Commandment’s interdiction of coveting what belongs to one’s
neighbour.2 His anthropological model r evolves around the tenet that human beings
desire what belongs to one’s neighbour because of a lack of autonomous identity.
The object that belongs to one’s neighbour seems desirable because the other seems
to possess an identity that the self is lacking. Hence it is not so much the object that
is being desired but the very being of the person possessing the object. Human
conflicts, according to Girard, are based on the imitation of apparently independent
desires of others. For Girard, the fallenness of hum anity is a problem of deviated
desire. After the Fall the desire for transcendence, for being that previously was
met in an imitation of God is directed to one’s neighbour in an act of deviated
1Cojocaru: Man’s Desire Exceeds His Grasp
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2010
transcendency. Or as he has put it in Deceit, Desire and the N ovel: “Men become
gods to each other.”3
In the course of the film both magicians obtain possession of their rival’s
diary and discover their imitative desire for the other’s being. In the following
example, Borden reads how Angier describes the experience of reading Borden’s
diary:
I saw happiness, happiness that should have been mine. But I was wrong.
His notebook reveals that he never had the life that I envied. The family life
that he craves one minute he rails against the next, demanding freedom. His
mind, his mind is a divided one. His soul is restless. His wife and child
tormented by his fickle and contradictory nature.4
Both magicians realize eventually that the imitation of the other’s apparently
superior desire has been an imitation of nothingness, as neither of them possesses
the happiness that they think the rival does.
The relation of imitated desire in the case of the magicians to utopia can be
unraveled, if one examines the nature of the rivals’ profession. Cutter (played by
Michael Caine), Angi er’s “ingénieur” (a designer of tricks) explains the role of the
magicians thus: “[They are] men who live by dressing up plain and sometimes
brutal truths to amaze, to shock.”5 The magician’s role is to simulate a reality that
can never be achieved but app ears real because of the magician’s skill to disguise
2Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 14 [2010], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol14/iss1/7
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.14.01.07
the plain truth of the trick. Every magic trick is in that sense utopian, as the reality
it simulates is nowhere to be found.6
Angier’s professional envy is centered on a trick Borden calls “the
transpo rted man”, in which he disappears behind a door on one side of the stage
and immediately reappears on the other side, by opening another door. Cutter sees
through the illusion at once and points out that Borden uses a double – which he
indeed does. Angier then replicates Borden’s trick by hiring an out -of-work actor
who resembles him. But his trick is not good enough, as Borden, as is revealed at
the end of the film, has a twin brother with whom he performs the trick. Because
Angier cannot replicate Borden’ s trick he suspects that there is more to it than the
simple usage of a perfect double. Throughout the film, Borden’s secret is set before
Angier’s eyes, like a purloined letter, but he simply does not want to see it.
Borden’s trick that fuels the utopian dream of instantaneous transportation
comes at the cost of sharing one life with his twin brother. The Bordens have to
continually hide the fact that there are two Bordens to the public and to Angier.
They have to be happy with sharing one life in order fo r the trick to work. Their
trick in terms of utopia is based on the view expressed in Ancient and many early
modern utopias that scarcity of goods is a datum that made the utopias simple and
static.7 It is instructive a t this point to look in more detail a t the roots of utopia as a
literary genre. The foundational, “classic” pieces of utopia, More’s Utopia,
3Cojocaru: Man’s Desire Exceeds His Grasp
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2010
Tommaso Campanella’s City of the Sun and Johann Valentin Andreae’s
Christianapolis were influenced by the classic pagan myth of the Golden Age, the
Hellenic ideal city as portrayed in Plato’s Republic and the Christian idea of the
City of God. But whereas the Golden Age lies in the past and the Hellenic ideal city
is more real in Plato’s world of ideas, it is the Judeo -Christian tradition that
introduced the idea that a perfect world could be established in the future on earth.
As Krishan Kumar explains: “The important thing about the Jewish prophecies,
from the point of view of the later utopia, is that they placed the new order firmly
on this earth.”8
This order, however, as is made clear in the Book of Daniel is brought about
“without hands”, i.e. by the hands of God and not by human beings.9 Likewise, the
idea of the Millenium, introduced by the Book of Revelation and developing the
concept of an end of history in the Book of Daniel, is introduced through
supernatural means through the Second Coming of Christ. For traditional Christian
Orthodoxy since Augustine, there could be no additional earthly millenium
supervening between the advent of Christ and t he Last Judgment.10 The only
institution that functioned as a kind of simulacrum on earth of a divine order was
the Church as the body of Christ.11 Even though throughout the Middle Ages there
were numerous heretical Millenarianist movements that tried to br ing about the
4Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 14 [2010], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol14/iss1/7
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.14.01.07
Millenium by violence,12 “the dominant and decisive teaching of Christianity was
that Christ’s kingdom was not of this world.”13
In the context of The Prestige ’s magic an exemplification of the bringing
about of a new order “without hands” from the Book of Daniel might be useful:
when King Nebuchadnezzar asks the Chaldeans to interpret his dream of the statue
of gold, silver, bronze, iron and clay, he is well aware of the staged nature of all
magic, sorcery and astrology. He refuses to be fooled , to enter the contract of
deception with the magicians, by not telling them his dream. He thus insists on a
true miracle not a staged one. The Chaldeans’ reaction is understandable. If the king
does not play along according to the rules of their art, they cannot perform it: “There
is not a man upon the earth that can show the king’s matter: therefore there is no
king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or astrologer, or
Chaldean.”14 Daniel eventually manages to achieve the impossible a nd interprets
the dream for Nebuchadnezzar. But he is only able to do so with superhuman
support, with the help of God, who is the revealer of all secrets. Borden’s
transported man on the other hand remains a trick, an illusion on the level of
Nebuchadnezz ar’s sorcerers. The “miracle” is only a simulacrum of the real miracle
that is not possible without the intervention of God.
Like Borden’s trick , Thomas More’s Utopia demands a system that restricts
human desire and forces human beings to share the scarce resources with their
5Cojocaru: Man’s Desire Exceeds His Grasp
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2010
fellow human beings. More uses the monastic ideal of the City of Man as the body
of Christ as a model, which can foreshadow the City of God. Only through
restraining desire can a sketch of the heavenly city of God be created on earth. This
utopian model, according to Roland Schaer, “unlike millenarian visions and
eschatological promises does not call for the intervention of divine providence.”15
The goals, however, remain the same as in utopian thought involving divine
intervention. It is important to bear in mind, however, that, as for the Bordens, so
for More and the early utopians, the utopia remains a magic trick, an illusion on the
level of Nebuchadnezzar’s sorcerers that can only be achieved through rigorous
discipline and personal hardship. And this is exactly why Angier is not willing to
accept the simple workings of the trick. In his version of the trick he has to take his
bows under the stage, while his double reaps the appreciation of the audience.
Angier is not willing to pay the necessary price of sharing his life with another
human being in order for the trick to work.
Jacob Bronowski, in Magic, Science and Civilization, explains that the age
of science does no longer suppose the existence of two separate logics of the natural
and the supernatural but is trying to form a single picture of the whole of nature
including man.16 Science thus claims to be able to achieve what in the Judaeo -
Christian tradition is strictly God’s prerogative and in the early Utopias is achieved
as a mere shadow at the price of restricting desire. The scientific utopia that reaches
6Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 14 [2010], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol14/iss1/7
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.14.01.07
its apex in the 19th century no longer assumes, as the classic utopia does, that i f at
all, it is only reachable at the expense of hardship and temperance of desire. While
More regretfully observed that utopia was something he may rather wish for than
hope for, the claim of the scientific utopia was “that utopia was ultimately, in the
foreseeable future, realizable.”17 Francis Bacon, the inventor of the scientific
utopia, had made the necessary adjustment by an extraordinary synthesis of
Christianity and science. Bacon accepted the orthodox view of the Fall but
introduced the idea that it could be overcome through scientific investigation that
could create an easier, happier and healthier life.18 Although Bacon’s utopias,
according to Schaer, are built “on the advancement of knowledge and the power of
the learned men”, the aim was still to resuscitate the Kingdom of God by relating
his utopias to the prophecies of the Millenium of Daniel and Isaiah.19 The idea of
scientific progress could give rise to a utopia in which the age -old restriction of
scarcity was at last overcome.
Angier therefor e turns to Nikola Tesla (played by David Bowie) and the
promises of science to solve the problem of the transported man. If there were a
way of making the illusion real of actually miraculously transporting himself across
the stage, Angier, so he thinks, w ould no longer have to share the appreciation of
the audience with anyone. Angier requests Tesla to build a transporting device.
Tesla’s machine does, however, not work as expected. Instead of transporting him,
7Cojocaru: Man’s Desire Exceeds His Grasp
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2010
the machine produces a clone of Angier. It is significant that although science does
in a sense deliver what it promises, Angier is nevertheless returned to the initial
situation in which he has to share his life with a double, another human being. He
can no longer complain that his double is not as good as Borden’s identical twin,
as his double in fact is even better than an identical twin – it is himself. Angier’s
reaction to the creation of an identical double is the same as to the previous double.
He is not willing to pay the price of sharing his life with another human being.
Instead he repeats the cloning process in each performance of his version of “the
transported man” and drowns the old self in a water tank that he places underneath
the stage. There can only ever be one version of Angier.
Thus even though science is successful in delivering an abundance of
doubles, the initial problem of desire remains: “If the ‘old Adam’ will and must out,
if ineradicable greed or aggression will continue to plague utopia, then it is futile to
invent it.”20 The situation of rivalry is recreated every time a new Angier is cloned.
The desire for the being of the other leads to the killing of the rival. But this desire
is not satiated and a new obstacle is created that again must be killed. In the case of
Angier, the creation of the obstacle is effected by Tesla’s duplicating device.
Tesla’s failure to build a transporter is not be read as the failure of science to deliver
what it promises – science does indeed create a utopia undreamt of in previous
8Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 14 [2010], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol14/iss1/7
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.14.01.07
centuries. Bu t in The Prestige it is portrayed as not being able to change the nature
of human desire.
Even if through the scientific utopia scarcity can be replaced by abundance,
the problem of unfulfilled desire that is a desire for the rival’s position will always
turn the abundance once more into scarcity. Once the obstacle in the form of the
rival is overcome, a new obstacle has recurrently to be created because the position
of the rival does not offer the promised being. This is symbolized in The Prestige
by the c ontinuous creation of new Angiers. Having defeated Borden as a rival,
Angier becomes his own rival. Nothing material – even if available in abundance –
can appease the desire for being that fuels the deviated transcendency.21 Set at the
eve of World War I, The Prestige foreshadows the mechanized horrors to come.
The abundance created by science turns the world into a dystopian nightmare rather
than a utopian paradise, because, as G.K. Chesterton claims in the initial quotation,
the problem of conflictive des ire and human greed remains unsolved by science. In
a conversation with Angier Nikola Tesla remarks how the phrase “man’s reach
exceeds his grasp” is a lie and how actually “man’s grasp exceeds his nerve.”22 In
Angier’s case, however, the phrase has to unde rgo a further modification: man’s
(conflictive) desire exceeds both his reach and his grasp.
1 Chesterton, G.K., “Mr H.G. Wells and the Giants”, in Heretics. London: Bodley Head, 1905. 73 -
9Cojocaru: Man’s Desire Exceeds His Grasp
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2010
2 Girard, René. I See Satan Fall Like Lightning . Trans. James G. Williams. Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis
Books, 2001. 9.
3 Girard René. Deceit, Desire and the Novel . Trans. Yvonne Freccero. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
Press, 1965. 61.
4 See Nolan (2006), 1:11:58.
5 See Nolan (2006), 22:54.
6 The term “Utopia” was coined from the Greek “outopos” meaning “nowhereplace” and
“eutopos” meaning “good place. The “u” of “utopia” thus unites in itself the “ou” and “eu” the
“nowhere” -part and the “good” -part.
7 Kumar, Krishan. Utopia and Anti -Utopia in Modern Times . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987. 31.
8 Ibid., 14. Kumar argues that utopia appears only in societies with classical and Christian heritage
(1987, 19).
9 Daniel 2:34. All quotations from the Bible are from the King James Version. Lyman Tower
Sargent distinguishes utopias brought about without human effort and those brought about with
human effort. See “Utopian Traditions: Themes and Variations,” in: Utopia : The Search for the
Ideal Society in the Western World , eds. Roland Schaer, Gregory Claeys, and Lyman Tower
Sargent. New York / Oxford: The New York Public Library / Oxford University Press, 2000. 8.
10 Kumar (1987), 14.
11 Ibid., 18.
12 See Cohn, Norman. The Pursuit of the Millennium: Revolutionary Millenarians and Mystical
Anarchists of the Middle Ages . London: Paladin, 1970.
13 Kumar (1987), 22.
14 Daniel 2:10.
15 Kumar (1987), 22.
16 Jacob Bronowski, Magic, Science, and Civilization. New York: Columbia Univer sity Press,
1978. 39.
17Kumar (1987), 30.
18 Ibid., 29 -31.
19 Daniel 2:10
10Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 14 [2010], Iss. 1, Art. 7
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol14/iss1/7
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.14.01.07
20 Ibid., 28.
21 Girard (1965), 137.
22 See (Nolan 2006), 50:38.
11Cojocaru: Man’s Desire Exceeds His Grasp
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2010
