The_Machinist_Academic
In repo

LINKS + BSA
Advertise HereShop ProjectorScreen.com for the bestprojectors and projector screens.
Weird Band NamesHow to write a script for a TV show PDFMarketing EnablementT. E. HahnT. E. HahnJune 17, 2016June 17, 2016HORRORHORROROld Anxieties, New Bodies: DemystifyingOld Anxieties, New Bodies: DemystifyingMasculinity in Brad Anderson’s Masculinity in Brad Anderson’s The MachinistThe Machinist(2004)(2004)00
PREVIOUS STORY“That’s Actually Kind of Funny. It’s SoStupid”: Irony and Nostalgia in AlexRoss Perry’s The Color Wheel (2011)
NEXT STORYBook Review: Into the Dark: TheHidden World of Film Noir, 1941-1950,by Mark A. Vieira
Ghost Story: ChristianTafdrup’s Speak NoEvil/Gæsterne (2022)September 30, 2022The Horror of aNation’s Despair: RobZombie’s 31 (2016)September 4, 2016A Brutal Nobility:Painting Death in TheHouse with LaughingWindows (Pupi Avati,1976)June 30, 2014Candymen: Slumming,Scarifying, andGentrifying in 1992 and2022February 22, 2022ALSO IN BRIGHT LIGHTS
0 Comments1Login
LOG IN WITHOR SIGN UP WITH DISQUSName
Start the discussion…
It is this very concept of challenging traditional models and exposing not viscera butinconsistencies within societal constructs that makes The Machinist arguably one of the mosthorrifying films ever made.* * *When Brad Anderson agreed to film The Machinist (2004), he wanted to do more than make asuccessful movie or box office hit; he sought to create “a movie that … [defied] people’simpressions of what a horror movie is supposed to deliver” by slowly building a sense ofinescapable dread (Anderson). During the same year that The Machinist was released, filmslike Dawn of the Dead (Snyder, 2004), Saw (Wan, 2004), and Shaun of the Dead (Wright, 2004)earned top spots in the horror genre, and all for similar reasons: their success as horrorfilms, like many, hinged primarily on predictable spectacle in abundance – disemboweledtorsos, blood-slicked floors, and usually exposed feminine flesh. By this standard, one maynot even consider The Machinist a horror film at all. But it is this very concept of challengingtraditional models and exposing not viscera but inconsistencies within societal constructsthat makes The Machinist arguably one of the most horrifying films ever made.
In the film, Trevor Reznik is a white, middle-class male who, according to him, “[has not]slept in a year.” It is revealed late in the film that this is due to a traumatic incident heexperienced, which he does not remember until the end of the film because he has repressedthe event; while distracted at the wheel of his car, he struck and killed a little boy, and, in apanic, drove away without claiming responsibility. Consequently, he has lost so much weightthat he “looks like he’s right on death’s door” (Anderson). His job as a machinist in a factoryrelies on precision, composure, and focus, all qualities of his that have begun to erode sincethe aforementioned incident. Trevor hallucinates, seeing and speaking with a man namedIvan, whom he believes works in the factory as well. Soon enough, his deterioration affectshis co-workers when, while hallucinating, he backs into a machine, accidentally turning it onand maiming a fellow machinist. Even his fellow male co-workers ostracize him when hebecomes a liability and something with which they cannot identify. This begins his noirefforts to track Ivan as he blames him for his predicament. His paranoia grows, his sanitydisintegrates, and his only source of comfort comes from the companionship of two women:Stevie, a prostitute, and Maria, an airport café waitress. But soon enough, his delusional statebecomes even too much for them. By the end of the film, Trevor remembers who he is, thekiller of the boy. He takes responsibility for the accident and turns himself into the police,where he is finally able to sleep, for the first time in a year, in a prison cell.Very little has been written on this film, and what has been published deals primarily withTrevor as “a man who has been consumed by his own guilty conscience” (Anderson). Thisidentifies Trevor’s “repetiti[ve]-compulsions” (“Beyond the Pleasure Principle”) as a means todisavow the traumatic origin. However, this myopic viewing itself disavows manycomponents of a much more complex issue being presented to the spectator. The mostimportant image shown consistently throughout this film is Trevor’s exposed, vulnerabletorso. It is a body of “walking bones, with tatters of fungus-pale flesh stretched drum-tautover his organs. It’s a grotesque spectacle, one that makes an already unpleasant movieworse” (Murray). In horror, it is common for the tortured body to be female, or at leastfeminized, and as Carol Clover implies, the “female [ … ] in fear and in pain” allows men toidentify with the role of victim (Clover 5). But it is highly uncommon for the male body to bevisually presented as inadequate, especially in horror films, with the exception of“comeback” stories of weak kids gaining revenge on their bullies through some achievement.However, even then, in the end the “wimp” is empowered and masculinized to some degree –for example, in the film Lucas (Seltzer, 1986). In The Machinist, Trevor literally is inadequatein terms of his masculinity, without muscle, reduced to skin and bones. It is also important tonote again that Trevor is white, and ironically “white male power has benefited enormouslyfrom keeping whiteness and masculinity in the dark” (Robinson 1). But this film exposes thewhite male “masculinity … as victimized by inhabiting a wounded body, and such a movedraws not only on the pervasive force of corporeal pain but also on an identity politics of thedominant” (Robinson 6).Superficially, Trevor is feminized and victimized as he is presented as inadequate, as in mosthorror movies. But further investigation proves that Trevor is in fact not completelyfeminized. He engages in many stereotypically masculine tendencies: he has sex with awoman, works in a mostly male profession as a machinist, takes a paternal role with Maria’sson, and enjoys the attention of flirting with the opposite sex, but he is also woundedthroughout the film. He is “a character who is literally dying” (Canfield) and weakened by hisinsomniac condition. Furthermore, his feminine and masculine selves are presented as twophysically separate bodies. Therefore, Trevor is a unique, decrepit form: an unbody.Paradoxically, Trevor is so pale, so weak and spectral that his presence is the registrant of hisown deterioration; and yet, his presence is so phantasmal that his own existence andcondition require the presence of other characters to be intelligible. Given this, what doesthis mean for a white male to be presented as wounded, sexually ambiguous, and almostillusory? What does this film purport causes such a condition? Why did Andersonparticularly choose the horror film genre to display such a condition? What does this meanfor the spectator to have the ability to both witness a physically and psychologically uniquewhite male and his slow deterioration? Ultimately, The Machinist seems to claim that thegreatest of horrors is the white male in crisis, unable to adhere to masculine norms.Consequently, this societally perpetuated ideal, that all white males are, or must be,heterosexual and masculine, is exposed as an inherently flawed yet indestructible societalconstruct, and the individual’s failure to achieve such a standard results in the redefinition ofhis identity and isolation from society.
IvanIn order to understand the nature of Trevor’s anxiety regarding his masculinity and uniquephysical form, other characters and their relationships and interactions with Trevor must beexplored. The first is Ivan. He is, in many ways, visually grotesque and appears almost out ofTrevor’s imagination. This is plainly because he does, for Ivan represents the grotesque idealof normative masculinity that is both separate and yet a distinct part of Trevor. Even Ivan’scar, a 1969 Pontiac Firebird, is imbued with muscular strength and high performance. Theparticular model used in the film is the Firebird’s original body type, a classic example of apopular type of car known as a muscle car. Ivan is stocky in appearance as well, typicallywearing sunglasses, boots and a leather jacket, and he smokes. In each scene in which he ispresented, he walks with a limp as if seeming to imply the inherent flaw in masculinity itself.Yet he moves with a casual indifference regarding time and responsibility, even when Trevoris chasing him in a car. Furthermore, Ivan’s size and shaved head are notably phallic, but themost striking feature is his hand. To know more about Ivan, Trevor follows him to a barwhere they sit, drink, and chat about life. This is where Ivan reveals his deformed hand. Heapparently had an accident years prior and lost fingers. To repair the hand, theysubsequently had to take “a big toe from [his] left foot and a pinky from [his] right. [This] iswhy [he] walks with a limp.” Ivan further admits that he cannot “shuffle cards like [he] usedto, but the ladies sure like it,” while wiggling his finger in a sexually suggestive manner. Inother words, Ivan sacrificed his gait to maintain his ability to please women. Trevor isshocked and speechless. He quickly takes a sip of his drink, not knowing how to respond.Ironically, Ivan remarks that Trevor looks like he has “seen a ghost.” However, it is Trevorwho is spectral in this scene as his face is whitewashed under the florescent lights of the bar,surrounded by suspended cigarette smoke as transparent as his body. He has attempted tomatch Ivan’s masculinity by drinking with him at the bar, but he cannot seem to fully live upto Ivan’s standards after being confronted with stereotypical, heterosexual expectations.Immediately, Ivan does not take responsibility for his sexual comment and its unsettlingimpact on Trevor; instead, the issue becomes Trevor and his inability to conform, accept andrespond to the suggestive remark. This, coupled with the aforementioned visual effects, arethe moments that redefine the male body as an anxious figure that cannot comfortably existoutside of the binary of masculine norm and feminine other, so Anderson presents a malebody that is physically and heterosexually barely present, not fully able to commit.
Trevor and StevieThe other characters who are imperative in understanding Trevor’s anxiety are Stevie,Maria, and Maria’s son, Nicholas – all female or feminine. The important female roles in thefilm complete a binary of fantasy and reality. Stevie, with whom Trevor has sex, is imperfectand flawed, yet achievable for Trevor as he is presented as an insufficient male. She curses, isoften scantily clad or nude, and is presented frequently as physically and emotionallybruised by “clients” and an obsessive ex-boyfriend. She routinely comments on Trevor’semaciated body, saying things like, “If you were any thinner, you wouldn’t exist.” BecauseTrevor is also physically deficient, it appears as though the foundation on which theirrelationship is built is one of shared cracks, missing bricks, and mutual subjugation.
Maria and TrevorIn contrast, Maria is an image of perfection. She is polite and endearing, usually smiling, fullyclothed, and aesthetically attractive. Trevor seems romantically interested in Maria beforethis moment as he has been driving out of his way to merely talk with her. The two are firstpresented together after Maria invites Trevor to spend the day at the carnival with her andNicholas. At the carnival, Maria asks Trevor to take a picture of her and Nicholas in front ofthe carousel. As Trevor raises the camera, the spectator too can see Trevor’s view through hislens. It is a warped, distorted version of the original image of Maria and her son.Furthermore, it is revealed later that this is a distorted image of a photograph that was takenof Trevor and his own mother years prior, but at this time, Trevor does not remember thephoto, only that he has been here before with his mother.In this scene in particular, Anderson uses multiple gazes and thresholds as a means to exposethe complexity of masculinity through representation. First, there is the spectator’s gaze onthe film, then the camera filming the film, then Trevor’s gaze, and here, the camera’s gazewhich he is using. Finally, there is the image of Maria and her son as a means to symbolicallyrepresent the origin of femininity – Trevor’s memory of and relationship with his mother, oras Carl Jung would argue, his anima, a collection of all feminine or female figures whichrepresents “Woman” (Neumann). This origin of femininity in Trevor is expressed assomething he repressed long ago given his inability to identify the cause of his anxiety in thisscene. This photo that Trevor is attempting to take is uncanny as his anxiety stems from“what is known of old and long familiar” (“The Uncanny” 340). Trevor’s view of Maria andher son resembles this feminine origin, but it is also different from his archetypal origin offemininity. Consequently, Trevor feels desire for Maria because the image of Maria and herson reminds him unconsciously of his own mother. It is this unconscious memory of hismother that is “projected upon the person of the beloved, [Maria,] and is one of the chiefreasons for [his] passionate attraction [for her]” (Jung 198). Maria is a distant representationof his mother, or more generally, femininity itself. Therefore, it is implied that Trevor wasforced long ago to repress and defer original femininity. Even the Holden Caulfield-esquebackground, a revolving carousel, resonates with Trevor’s unconscious cycle of repressionand projection. This uncanny image induces a sense of horror within him as expressed whenhe subsequently lowers the camera without taking the photo, exposing a shocked andunsettled expression across his pallid visage.
The film’s gaze then moves in front of Trevor and aims directly toward him. But Trevor’sgaze aims just right of the film’s gaze, avoiding directly confronting the audience. If thepurpose of the horror genre is to shock, scare, and or disturb the spectator, then here, Trevoravoids confronting the very origin of horror itself: the audience. Also, the film seems toaddress the spectator’s role in Trevor’s repetition of projecting the repressed image oforiginal femininity onto others. The spectator too experiences the uncanny in viewing Trevorbecause the spectator projects his image of masculinity onto Trevor as Trevor resemblesparts of the male form and yet, is deficient given his weakened, anxious, and frightened state.Therefore, the horror that the spectator experiences as in this scene is a result of Trevor’suniquely disturbing male form and othered identity coupled with his inability to confrontand embrace his femininity.Furthermore, there is another level of anxiousness that the spectator experiences as a resultof watching Trevor experience something uncanny and simultaneously experiencing theuncanny himself: a meta-uncanny moment. From the gaze of the spectator, Trevor’s uncannyexperience can be considered a representation of the original uncanniness that the spectatorexperiences. This happens because the spectator is forced to confront not only the inabilityfor a male to reconcile with his repressed femininity but also the spectator’s own faultyperception of what it means to be a man. Trevor’s frail, ghostly, dying body is then a mirrordirected toward the male spectator, and in horror films and psychological thrillers especially,“mirrors and reflective surfaces are used … to hint at the unstable nature of identity”(Ruddell 61). His body is therefore a symbolic haunting of the inevitable alienation anddeterioration of the repressed male psyche. The spectator can only wonder how much longerTrevor can live, what is keeping him alive, and when he will finally be at peace because thespectator too feels the anxiety and yearns for solace, a common experience in horror movies:the need for resolution.After Trevor’s uncanny experience, he returns to the illusion, Maria and Nicholas, and takesthe photo. He remarks that the scene reminds him of his childhood, and it appears as thoughTrevor is happy for a brief moment recalling his mother and youth, but the moment is short-lived when Maria’s ex calls to wish her a happy Mother’s Day. To this, Maria chooses to speakwith her ex on this pseudo-date and leaves Trevor in an adjuvant role to care for Nicholas,but he takes this as an opportunity to prove his paternal abilities to Maria and himself. Thecamera fades in and out of various phases of Trevor and Nicholas’ walk together, including amoment when they enter a tunnel, a motif used in the film to periodically express thejourney and metamorphosis Trevor undergoes. Nicholas mostly asks Trevor questions on thewalk, yearning for the guidance of a positive male figure that does not exist in his life. But itis in this brief scene in the tunnel that Trevor identifies with the boy when he reveals to himthat his father left him when he was Nicholas’ age as well. The striking similarities betweenTrevor and Nicholas are not coincidental. Similar to Ivan’s function, Anderson means tocreate a sort of double to Trevor again. But unlike Ivan, Nicholas represents the femininepole of the masculine/feminine binary. It was Ivan who represented ideal masculinity, andhere, Nicholas represents innocence and vulnerability, but more importantly, he symbolizesmale femininity because, not only is he prepubescent, but he also lacks a paternal figure,which results in him being raised by a woman – more specifically, Maria, femininity herself,according to the aforementioned interpretation.Trevor too was raised only by a woman. Knowing this pain, he attempts to take the place ofNicholas’ father here, but only temporarily, which further defers Trevor from patriarchy. Heis neither a blood-related father nor a stepfather. His patriarchal role in this scene is weak,barely visible like his physical form, and so far removed from paternity. In addition, ifNicholas is considered a part of Trevor’s identity, then Trevor here is ironically acting as hisown father in an attempt to fill the void of patriarchal abandonment, but he cannot due tohis inability to reconcile with his masculine identity. In fact, Nicholas senses his transienceand asks if Trevor will be around his mother more often on this walk, conveying Trevor’sunconscious yearning for femininity. It is revealed later in the film that Nicholas is actuallythe child Trevor struck and killed, possibly an hallucination. For this reason, this film canmerely be interpreted as a psychological portrayal of Trevor’s repression of the traumaticaccident instead of a symbolic implication of sexuality and gender. It is therefore valid toassert that this created double is Trevor’s way of “coping with the repressed” (Ruddell 55),but it is more important to ask what is being repressed, not is Trevor repressing.
Nicholas and MariaWhen Trevor tells Nicholas that his father left him too, he continues by telling Nicholas that,although it was difficult not having a father growing up, “[i]t made [him] realize what awonderful mother [he] had” and that Nicholas would “realize that too someday.” As hespeaks to Nicholas, he is symbolically offering his feminine self words of caution, that hewould recognize the importance of his femininity one day, ominously foreshadowing therepression of those qualities simultaneously. Their voices echoe off the walls of the tunnel.Echoes are yet another important motif present in the film. This sound effect contributes in asimilar way as Anderson’s earlier use of multiple gazes to the concept of representation. LikeTrevor’s voice that weakens, changes, and becomes less and less like the original soundproduced, the message gets lost, muddled, and distorted as he progresses farther down thetunnel. This film portrays the male body that undergoes the transformation as, like theechoes, a weakening process due to the recognition of his masculine deficiencies. Thecamera’s gaze is at the end of the tunnel watching both Trevor and Nicholas walking towardthem; therefore, the spectator is again positioned as having already experienced this dark,short “tunnel journey.” Furthermore, it is an ominous foreshadowing of Trevor’s physicalform, a waning, dying masculinity and subsequent disappearance. Ironically, it issimultaneously a reflection on original masculinity and a foreshadowing of the future of itsnon-existence. Soon after this, it becomes clearer that Trevor’s journey is not a strengthening,empowering adventure.Upon exiting the tunnel, Nicholas notices a sign, existing out of sight of the gaze of thecamera, of a ride in the park reading “Route 666.” When he asks Trevor what it means,Trevor carefully explains that it is a ride and that a Route is a road that one takes on a “longjourney,” disavowing the 666 of the sign as if attempting to protect him in some paternal way.Because of this, Nicholas is intrigued and runs to the ride despite Trevor’s attempt topersuade him into waiting for his mother. The boy, unsheltered by and detached from hismother, is subjected to the horrors of the mature, masculine world. The two begin the rideand enter into another tunnel that quickly progresses from an exciting, childhood ventureinto a corrupt, adult nightmare, mimicking Trevor’s own dark, psychological journey. Incarnivalesque fashion, the initial attractions they pass are seemingly innocuous, mostly acollection of fake zombies. But once they pass a Native American holding a hatchet and asevered hand, the demarcation between past and present, cliché and personal, melodramaand horror diminishes as seen through the expression that arises on Trevor’s face. Thesevered hand is a reminder of a mistake Trevor made in the machine factory. It alsoreferences Ivan’s deformed hand and the maiming effects of masculinity. As the ridecontinues, there is a “GUILTY” sign next to a hanging body. This ride of shame remindsTrevor of all his past mistakes and shortcomings, all of the ways in which he failed as afriend, coworker, son, and man. From henceforth, the attractions become more realistic andlinked to Trevor’s specific dread and past trauma, including a burning car next to a deadbody. Given the carnival in which this ride exists and the structure of the attractions on theride, it is reminiscent of the traditional cinema of attraction, “a montage of spectacle”(Gunning 3) that displays Trevor’s fears, trauma, insecurities, and inadequacies. Andersonuses this early form of cinema as a means to objectify and expose Trevor as a man whoinevitably is always exposed and under the scrutiny of the ride, the hegemonic masculine“machine.” Even the camera shots assist in conveying this examination when, on the ride,besides the attractions, all but Trevor’s frightened, pale face is in complete darkness as ifunder a spotlight.
Toward the end of the ride, there is a literal fork on the path. Despite Trevor’s insistence forNicholas to take the light and literal right path, the direction marked “Road to Salvation,” heturns down the darker path, the direction marked “Highway to Hell.” Lights flash, smokespreads, and images relating to Trevor’s car accident quickly flicker on the screen. The guilthe experiences from the accident is more than the literal guilt of running from the scene andthe life he took. It is instead a constant reminder of the repression of his anima, which hecurrently disavows. Suddenly, Nicholas falls into a spell of epilepsy. The next scene cuts toTrevor holding Nicholas in his arms and running out of the tunnel into a crowd of people, butthere is no sound for a brief moment. The deafening silence allows the image of Trevor’sinability to protect the boy to resonate louder than words and music. It also parallels Trevor’sphysical state, stripped of mass and exposed as just the image of the male as insufficient andvulnerable, unable to control the situation, and “wounded by … patriarchy itself” (Shamirand Travis 207). Considering how already deficient he is before the ride as a paternal figureto Nicholas, this failure only adds salt to his gaping masculine wounds.The majority of the film is spent depicting Trevor’s paranoia and delusions grow with everyfailed attempt to achieve manhood. It seems as though Anderson portrays Trevor as thesource of his own misfortune. This is partially true as he attempts to become something thatis unachieveable in Gatsby-esque fashion. When he fails at becoming the ideal male thatsociety manipulates him into becoming, he retreats to Stevie, the imperfect female prostitute.She disavows the hideousness of Trevor’s physically weak body. During one particular sexscene with these two characters, Trevor lies on the bed while Stevie kisses his bony body.Then she slides down below the camera’s gaze, apparently performing fellatio. The spectatorexpects Trevor’s subsequent pleasure to be expressed verbally or visually, but instead, Trevorconveys an expression of pain. He cannot even seek pleasure in heterosexual sex. Maybe thisis because it further unconsciously reminds him of his own inadequacies, or possibly becauseStevie is masculinized, making it difficult for Trevor to accept pleasure from the very thingthat causes him pain. Regardless, this places Trevor back in a position between the masculineand feminine binary, an uncomfortable position rejected by society. Therefore, the repressionof feminine qualities changes the “possibility of pleasure into a source of ‘pain’” (“Beyond thePleasure Principle”). It is this pain, however, that “the movie hinges on.” The spectator tooseeks pleasure in his pain while “watching Trevor go through this [physical and] emotionaltorment” (Canfield). But instead, the male spectator, too, finds only inevitable pain with eachfailed attempt at masculinity and the resurfaced memories of femininity. This conveysTrevor’s inability to consummate with heterosexuality as Stevie, even in her name, ismasculine. To have sex with the ideal female form, Maria (which he never does), according toheteronormative masculinity, is to adhere to its standards, which Trevor cannot. In fact,Trevor’s delusions and paranoia stemming from the guilt he experiences eventually ruins theonly relationship he has, with Stevie.By the end of their relationship, he mistakes his own image in a photograph for Ivan, themasculine ideal. He believes Stevie is cheating on him with Ivan. Despite Stevie attempting toconvince Trevor that the photograph is in fact a picture of him, Trevor cannot recognizehimself in the photo. He is insecure and physically cut and bruised from having been hit by acar earlier. Emotionally and physically, he is the weakest form of himself thus far. He breaksdown into tears and calls her a “fucking whore.” Stevie slaps him, kicks him out, andimmediately, Trevor’s feelings of rejection turn to anger because the only woman who hadaccepted him, a woman who is portrayed now as more masculine than he, has taken thedominant role in the relationship. This realization sends Trevor into his final downwardspiral before his epiphany at the end.
Ivan and TrevorTrevor retreats to the airport café to see Maria at work for comfort. This time, an olderwoman greets him at the counter. She reveals that Maria does not exist and that she has beenhis waitress for the past year. Outraged, Trevor slams the counter and wonders “if everybody[is] in on it.” Not only does this imply that society has contributed to his current state but thatthere is a stigma attached to talking about the male’s necessity to disavow femininity in orderto fit in and be accepted as a man. As he leaves the cafe, making a scene in front of peoplewaiting for their fights, the many gazes of the passengers in the terminal look with shock andhorror at the spectacle he is creating: “Let’s all laugh at Trevor,” Trevor yells in a fit beforeleaving.In the parking garage of the airport, he spots Ivan and follows his car to Trevor’s ownapartment. Much to his horror, Trevor watches Ivan exit the car with Nicholas, whom Trevornow believes has been kidnapped. Theoretically, Nicholas has been kidnapped. It is becauseof Ivan, ideal masculinity, that Trevor has been forced to repress his feminine self;heteronormative masculinity has hijacked his identity. Trevor, in heroic fashion, barges intothe apartment only to confront Ivan in his bathroom shaving with a knife. They engage in ascuffle for the blade, and Trevor mounts Ivan’s back. As he does this, Ivan remarks, “[m]akesure no one walks in. They might get the wrong idea.” Ivan frequently comments on ormocks Trevor’s manhood in an effort to weaken him and instill insecurity, even as Trevortakes the dominant role in the fight, threatening the masculine identity itself. In one quickmovement, Trevor grabs the knife and cuts Ivan’s throat. Despite Trevor’s effort topresumably kill masculinity, it is an illusion. Shortly after this, Trevor rolls up Ivan’s body ina carpet and brings it to the sea for burial, but upon unrolling the carpet, Ivan’s body is gone.“Who are you,” a voice beckons from the night behind Trevor. It is Ivan again, pointing theflashlight directly at Trevor, who is again under the laughing scrutiny of masculinity.
Following this scene, Trevor looks at a Post-it on his refrigerator. For the entire duration ofthe movie, Trevor has been finding Post-its that he has not remembered writing. He hadthought it was Ivan, but now, he realizes that he, himself, has been writing them. Finally, hecan answer the hangman riddle: K I L L E R. In a cathartic flood of emotions and memories,he recalls the accident, the boy he struck (Nicholas), the boy’s mother (Maria) running towardher son, and Trevor’s former self in the car, which he thought belonged to Ivan – the 1969muscle car. He ran from the scene of the crime without claiming responsibility for hitting theboy. In the end, Trevor turns himself into the police. Finally, he sits in an all-white cell andfalls asleep. Although this seems to be a moment of redemption for Trevor as he finally takesresponsibility for his crime and gains peace as a result, is he truly at peace? Before he entersthe cell, he sees Ivan outside the prison pointing to Trevor as if to say, “I’ll be waiting foryou.” There is no escape from the pressures and presence of masculine expectations. Ivanforces Trevor to take responsibility for the death of the boy, but Ivan never claimsresponsibility himself, for it would mean that the white, patriarchal hegemony would beexamined. Trevor is placed under scrutiny in order for the ideal to maintain its unexaminedexistence. The problem that exists in the end is that Trevor and Ivan are depicted as one.Ivan’s muscle car, job, clothes, and image in the photograph are inevitably all revealed to beTrevor. They are not separate. Therefore, it is logically the collection of the two who are atfault for the destruction, paranoia, ruined relationships, and disavowal of femininity.However, Nicholas is also a part of Trevor. The separation of Ivan, the masculine identity,from Nicholas, the feminine identity, leaves Trevor in the middle as a shell of his former selfwhen stripped of both. It is this male form that is scrutinized and demonized. The male bodymust be presented as either feminine, masculine, or both, like Stevie, for lacking bothfeminine and or masculine characteristics, as seen in the end, results in the male’s separationfrom society and reconstructed identity.By and large, the camera’s gaze seems to sympathize with men and the expectations placedupon them. It allows the spectator to see Ivan, Nicholas, Maria, and all other hallucinationsand psychological manifestations. Moreover, Ivan and the other characters are not merelyhallucinations as they have a profound, palpable impact on Trevor. Ironically, Trevor isconceptually present and yet physically waning and illusory. Ivan is physically present andyet conceptually illusory. Actuality, therefore, exists as the character of Trevor and the effectsIvan has on him. But it is not until the end that the spectator knows why Trevor is in thisstate, as if Anderson means to force the spectator to experience the repression and disavowalof femininity with Trevor. By the end, there is the epiphany that the spectator experiencestoo, the horror of what he, and we, has done. In this way, The Machinist “isn’t … a story thatactually happened, it’s … more of a cautionary … fable” (Anderson Twitch).
Christian Bale’s transformationChristian Bale lost roughly sixty-three pounds to capture the character of Trevor. This visualof the wounded male was instrumental in conveying the torment and disintegration thatoccurs to males struggling to be accepted. It is as if Trevor’s body is “a type of stage ofproduction – [a] statement against normative expectations of what ‘health’ looks like”(Brouwer 115). Interestingly, Bale accepted the role of Batman directly after this film and wasforced to gain the weight back as muscle to “bulk up” for the part, to look more like an heroic,athletic male. Batman’s character relies on a sort of duality very much like Trevor’s. Batmanis Batman for two primary reasons: revenge and a need to overcome childish fears thatapparently make men weak. Both identities, Batman and Bruce Wayne, are masculinized andtheir characters disavow femininity, whether it be Bruce’s playboy lifestyle or Batman’sheroics in the street. Therefore, the problem that seems to be wrong with normativemasculinity is that men have been forced to adhere to such standards for so long that whenthey fail to achieve the societally constructed ideal, the anxiety becomes too much to bear(Shamir and Travis 206). Whether merely a coincidence, an unconscious desire, or thepassion of an exemplary actor to fully become the character, Bale too returns to hismasculine identity for this role. So where does the cycle end, when does it break, and whatwill it take to allow the male to just exist free from muscle, sex, and form?Works CitedAnderson, Brad. “Brad Anderson on The Machinist.” Film4. N.p., n.d. Web. 03 May 2016.Brouwer, Dan. “The Precarious Visibility Politics of Self-stigmatization: The Case of HIV/AIDSTattoos.” EBSCOhost. Text and Performance Quarterly, n.d. Web.Canfield, Dave. “Brad Anderson: An Interview with the Director of Session 9 and TheMachinist.” TwitchFilm. N.p., 15 Oct. 2004. Web. 03 May 2016.Clover, Carol. “Men, Women, and Chain Saws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film Paperback– March 22, 1993.” Men, Women, and Chain Saws: Gender in the Modern Horror Film: Carol J.Clover: 9780691006208: Amazon.com: Books. N.p., n.d. Web. 03 May 2016.Freud, Sigmund. “IV. Sigmund Freud. 1922. Beyond the Pleasure Principle.” IV. SigmundFreud. 1922. Beyond the Pleasure Principle. N.p., n.d. Web. 02 May 2016.Freud, Sigmund. “The Uncanny.” The Uncanny. N.p., n.d. Web. 03 May 2016.Gunning, Tom. “The Cinema of Attractions Early Film, Its Spectator and the Avant-Garde.”Columbia (n.d.): n. pag. Web.Jung, C. G. The Collected Works of C.G. Jung: Complete Digital Edition. N.p.: n.p., n.d. 198.Print.Murray, Steve. “Dead Man Walking Gets a Chilly Interpretation.” The Atlanta Journal-Constitution 24 Nov. 2014: n. pag. Print.Neumann, Erich. “Anima/Animus.” Anima/Animus. N.p., n.d. Web. 03 May 2016.Robinson, Sally. “Marked Men: White Masculinity in Crisis.” Barnes & Noble. New York:Columbia University Press, ©2000, n.d. Web. 03 May 2016.Ruddell, Caroline. “The Besieged Ego.” – Caroline Ruddell. N.p., n.d. Web. 03 May 2016.Shamir, Milette, and Jennifer Travis. “Boys Don’t Cry? Rethinking Narratives of Masculinityand Emotion in the U.S.” Barnes & Noble. New York: Columbia University Press. 2002, n.d.Web. 03 May 2016. * * *The author would like to extend a special thanks to Scott Combs.Note: All images are screenshots from the film.— T. E. HahnT. E. Hahn holds an MFA in fiction from Fairfield University, and he is currently a PhD studentspecializing in contemporary American short fiction at St. John’s University. He teaches Englishat Great Neck North High School in New York, and his fiction, poetry, and nonfiction arefeatured in Evolution, The Knotting House Review, Headlock Press, Best Poem, a special edition ofTemenos, and textbooks on craft. His novel, Open My Eyes, was a finalist for a book prizethrough New Rivers Press, and his short story “Boy’s Night In” was a semi-finalist for theNorman Mailer Award. Recently, he was awarded a fellowship to study Theoretical Anxiety andthe Academic Novel.
SempriniUK
The Machinist trailerThe Machinist trailerThe Machinist trailerThe Machinist trailer
Watch on
Enter your search...Enter your search...Advertise Here
ABOUT
ARTISTS
MOVIES
GENRES
TV & STREAMING
BOOKS
CONTRIBUTORS
SUBSCRIBEADS
ShareBestNewestOldest
Powered by Disqus
Be the first to comment. SubscribePrivacyDo Not Sell My Data8
Advertise Here
© 2020 Bright Lights Film Journal | brightlightsfilm.comOnline since 1996 | ISSN: 0147-4049a Studio Hyperset expression · Design by Irina Beffa · Theme Art by Jim McDermottPrivacy
Drive MatchFind Your Perfect RideBrowse exclusive deals near you and save big when you shop local!Find Your Perfect Ride
