Machinist_Academic2
In repo

Journal of Religion & Film Journal of Religion & Film
Volume 10
Issue 1 April 2006 Article 11
4-1-2006
The Machinist The Machinist
Julien R. Fielding
Univ ersity of Nebr aska at Omaha , jfielding@unomaha.edu
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f
Please tak e our f eedback sur vey at: https:/ /unomaha.az1.qualtrics.com/jf e/form/
SV_8cchtFmpDyGfBLE
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Fielding, Julien R. (2006) "The Machinist, " Journal of Religion & Film : Vol. 10: Iss. 1, Ar ticle 11.
DOI: https:/ /doi.or g/10.32873/uno.dc.jr f.10.01.11
Available at: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f/vol10/iss1/11
This Film Re view is br ought t o you for fr ee and open
access b y DigitalCommons@UNO . It has been accepted
for inclusion in Journal of Religion & Film b y an
authoriz ed edit or of DigitalCommons@UNO . For mor e
information, please contact
unodigitalcommons@unomaha.edu .
The Machinist The Machinist
Abstr act Abstr act
This is a r eview of The Machinist (2004).
Creativ e Commons License Creativ e Commons License
This work is licensed under a Creativ e Commons A ttribution 4.0 License .
Author Notes Author Notes
PDF was par tially r emediated t o meet WCA G standar ds and r e-uploaded 4/30/2026
This film r eview is a vailable in Journal of Religion & Film: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f/vol10/iss1/11
Trevor Reznik (Christian Bale) hasn't slept in a year, and judging by his
jutting bones and sunken cheeks, he probably hasn't eaten during that same amount
of time. As several characters tell him: "If you were any thinner, you wouldn't
exist.”
Reznik , the lead character in The Machinist (2005), is a haunted man. An
industrial worker, he lives in a sparse, ill lit apartment, and his only real human
interaction is with a prostitute, Stevie (Jennifer Jason Leigh), and a waitress Marie
(Aitana Sanchez -Gijon). At work he meets Ivan (John Sharian), a man who will
change his life. As the film unfolds, Reznik becomes convinced that people are
conspiring against him. Post -It notes mysteriously appear on his refrigerator door
with a hangman's noose a nd missing letters. Then there's an industrial accident
that's caused by Ivan, and yet no one believes he exists. Is Reznik going crazy?
What is real and what isn't?
Billed as a psychological thriller, The Machinist is a brilliant exploration of
one man's psyche. More importantly, though, you might say that The Machinist is
a meditation on guilt. The reality of the film is that Reznik has committed a crime.
But instead of acknowledging his actions, he flees from them, spiritually and
physically. When Marie asks him "Is someone chasing you?” he replies, "No, but
they will when they find out who I am.” Just who is Reznik? The character will
1Fielding: The Machinist
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2006
spend the entire film trying to come to terms with not only who he is but also what
he's done.
To unravel The Machinist , it's useful to look at Reznik as a modern day
penitential. Since he's committed a sin, he's self -imposed a harsh penance, which
includes extreme mortification of the body. Not only does he forgo sleep and food,
but he also washes his hands with bleach and lye, and, at one point, throws himself
in front of a car. Reznik longs for confession, and won't have peace until he
confesses his sins. As he says, "I need someone to know.” But this is, at least
overtly, a secular film, and there aren't any priests waiti ng in the wings to absolve
him. Instead, his confessor is the police force, and once he's unburdened his "soul,”
he can finally sleep, bathed in the white light of his cell.
Written by Scott Kosar and directed by Brad Anderson, The Machinist has
a lot in c ommon with The Sixth Sense , Identity , Haute Tension , Memento and
Jacob's Ladder , films that make you think you have everything figured out until
you are hit with a twist ending. Your only recourse is to go back and watch them
again from the beginning. The Machinist only gets better with each viewing because
you begin to realize that every line reveals a clue. (Even the title El Maquinista
carries a double meaning. In English, it has been translated to The Machin ist, which
is essentially what the main charac ter does for a living. However, in Spanish, it can
2Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 10 [2006], Iss. 1, Art. 11
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol10/iss1/11
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.10.01.11
also mean "engine driver” or "engineer,” which provides the central clue to this
tale.)
With those repeated viewings, audience members may also begin to pick up
on the various symbols that point the way to a whole new realm of understanding.
There's a particularly important scene midway through the film in which Reznik
and Nicholas, the waitress's son, are taking a funhouse ride called Route 666. Every
image that they see reveals something from Reznik's pas t, present and future. It is
also during this ride that Reznik is presented with the first of many pathway choices
– select the left tunnel and go to hell, select the other and gain salvation. By the end
of the film, thanks to his conscience in the form of Ivan, Reznik finally has the
courage to accept his responsibility and choose the right path.
Like Anderson's previous film, Session 9, probably the only ghost story set
during daylight, The Machinist is atmospheric and insightful. Film and literary
buffs will enjoy the homages paid to Alfred Hitchcock, Kafka and Dostoevsky. Not
surprisingly, this indie film had a difficult time getting made in Hollywood and
barely attracted an audience at the box office. It's certainly worth a look, though,
and deserves to be better known.
3Fielding: The Machinist
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2006
