Truman_Show_Essay
In repo

HOMEARCHIVEFILM GUIDESBACK ISSUES
FILM CRITICISMquick search SearchDark City and The Truman Show:Surveillance and the Destabilizationof IdentityAlex FitchVolume 43, Issue 2: Space, Place, and Identities Onscreen, September 2019DOI: https://doi.org/10.3998/fc.13761232.0043.203
PermissionsAbstractBoth released in 1998, the films Dark City and e Truman Show offer very different science-fictional responses to the late twentieth centuryconcern of constant surveillance, as CCTV began to proliferate across modern cities. e Truman Show predicts the rise of Big Brother (the TVshow), with constant surveillance acting as a form of entertainment for the masses. Dark City is more overtly science-fictional, set in anenvironment mimicking film noir but run by aliens. It also depicts John Rawls’ “Veil of Ignorance” as an experiment run on an entire city, with thealiens rewriting the inhabitants’ pasts, social status and identities in order to understand how humanity works. is paper looks at how thesetwo films depict the surveillance of the (sub)urban environment as a way of manipulating and shaping its inhabitants, and how these depictionsparallel society at the end of the 20 Century.In 1998, two American films were released that question how identity is partially formed by one’s environment, e Truman Show(Weir 1998) and Dark City (Proyas 1998). e Truman Show is more familiar to non-specialist audiences, a satire about a then-nascent genre of reality television, which, rather than using the format of a house filled with cameras, depicts an entire town filmedfor television, inhabited by actors except for the star of the show – Truman Burbank – who is unaware that his entire life has beenbroadcast. e Truman Show also relies on a comedic version of 1950s melodrama to give the audience an idea of the genre they arewatching. Dark City also uses genre and associated temporal cues to give the audience a sense of familiarity, including the trappings offilm noir (hard boiled detectives, femmes fatale, night time city locations) plus a stylized world borrowing from a variety of science-fictional cities from Metropolis to Gilliam’s dystopian city state in Brazil.Dark City shows a decaying, polluted American city, where inhabitants never see light and the protagonist John Murdoch is framedfor a brutal murder. e environment of this world presented on screen – old fashioned cars, buses and movie theatres – suggests anyperiod between 1930 and 1950 (Figure 1). However, while the scenario of e Truman Show has a certain plausibility (whencompared to actual examples of reality television), Dark City is more overtly science-fictional, set on a planetoid constructed ofbuildings that can warp in size and shape, where inhabitants can be sent to sleep by the sinister humanoid aliens running the prisonthat contains them.
Figure 1. e femme fatale waits by the river in Dark City.In terms of milieu, the films could not be more different. However, as the plots progress, we discover the protagonists of each film livein locations manipulated by god-like figures who control both the landscape and the people within it. ese environments havesimilarities to a science experiment, and the protagonists - by accident (in the case of Dark City) or design (Truman) - are tested tosee how they will react to change. is paper will compare the experiences of the protagonists of each film and how their fictionallives allegorically comment on the experience of urban versus suburban living at end of the twentieth century.City LifeWriting on how city life affects inhabitants, late nineteenth century and early twentieth century authors considered thepsychological impact of claustrophobic streets and how individuals find their place amongst the multitude. Simmel writes: “epsychological foundation, upon which the metropolitan individuality is erected, is the intensification of emotional life due to theswift and continuous shift of external and internal stimuli... a deep contrast with the slower, more habitual... rural experience.”[1]Dark City shows city life as fast, intense and dangerous, with the seaside represented as a place that people want to escape to. eTruman Show, by contrast, shows suburbia bordered by the countryside (Figure 2), but equally dangerous – where fires and chemicalspills may impede traversing the landscape (Figure 3), and where the sea itself has a border, enclosed within an enormous studio.
Figure 2. Pastel colored suburbia in e Truman Show.
Figure 3: An escape route about to be blocked by fire in e Truman Show.Simmel also notes: “ere is perhaps no psychic phenomenon... so unconditionally reserved to the city as the blasé outlook ... the valueof the distinction between things... experienced as meaningless.”[2] When examining differences between protagonists of these films,there is a commonality that each is trying to assert their individuality, while the “ordinary” inhabitants of the city/suburban areahave accepted their world and are unmoved by it. Residents of Seahaven show passion only when advertising products to the camera– existence dictated by the money economy, which Simmel notes as another aspect of urban malaise – and inhabitants of theunnamed city in Dark City do not question such uncanny elements as untrustworthy memories and the constant night. Anotherconcept worth using to consider these films is Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon,[3] an idealized design for a prison that reduces the“deprivations and discomforts”[4] that prisoners were subjected to and enables greater monitoring of their movements. When used asa template for dystopian fiction, the panopticon is still a prison that allows for invisible monitoring of its inhabitants, even if treatedwell, as in the representation of comfortable suburban life in e Truman Show.Both films present a scenario where inhabitants are constantly monitored and their actions are manipulated. In this context,individualism becomes the most important part of the “experiment” being performed. Durkheim suggests that: “society makes usindividuals... individualism provides a new and powerful way of holding society together,”[5] and applying this notion to these filmssuggests that the controllers of each environment cherish emerging individuality. e controller of e Truman Show locates Trumanin a bland environment, but sees his individualism as a great form of entertainment for TV viewers. e strangers who run Dark Citywant a unique individual to emerge from their experiment to see how stimuli might affect the nature of humanity within theirprison. One could also argue that Truman’s individualism acts as a form of social cohesion – the other inhabitants have rolesspecifically to support (but not to liberate) him – and Murdoch’s individualism ultimately will lead him to liberate the others in hisjail, saving society from unwanted experimentation.We learn the nature of Truman’s predicament quickly: the movie cuts to how television is presenting his existence in a montage of hislife, including statistics about viewership. e Truman Show was released before broadcast of the first series of Big Brother, but therewere American shows that had preceded it such as e Real World on MTV (1992-present). While the genre it satirizes was starting tobecome familiar, the size of the world Truman inhabits would require an infrastructure that has not been attempted in the real world,but it is not an inconceivable scenario if a multi-million budget was made available to such a TV show. Within this science-fictionaltwist on reality TV , the show emphasizes American ideas of homely nostalgia (i.e. Truman’s town is modelled on 1950s/1960ssuburbia) rather than the more “dangerous” modern city.Lynn Spigel comments on how suburban homes are sites of traditional, white, heterosexual privileged inhabitants which “demonizewomen or men who strayed from their rightful place,”[6] and Truman can be seen as a disruptive element in that world, anenvironment he wants to escape from. He sees behind (Figure 4) the walls of his cage (at one point the opening of doors to anelevator reveals the artificial set behind) and wants to explore the outside world, while rejecting the homogenous, bland suburbiawhere he spent his life.
Figure 4: Truman examines a lamp that has fallen from the sky in e Truman Show.is conflict is at the heart of the film: audiences who watch his life on screen (Figure 5) want him to act strangely for theirentertainment, but the director does not want his actions to lead him off-set as this will end the program.
Figure 5. Diegetic television presentation of a dramatic moment in e Truman Show.It is entirely appropriate that his world looks like a pastel post-war pastiche due to the nostalgia for “a white, middle-class image ofsuburban families that comes to us largely through reruns of 1950s sitcoms.”[7] e Truman Show was made at the end of the 20century, when many aspects of American life such as gay rights, women’s reproductive rights, acceptance of people from differentethnicities and cultures were increasingly different to the world from half a century earlier, threatening white heterosexual privilege.e previous year saw the release of Pleasantville (Ross 1998), a fantasy comedy that illustrates this difference even more, presenting anarrative where modern Americans are transported inside an old monochrome sitcom. As their modern values “infect” theinhabitants of this world, it changes from black and white to color, with racial prejudice against people of color reflecting similarconcerns in the real world.Revisiting the Paste first scene after the opening credits of Dark City presents us with a film noir scenario, as a man wakes in a 1940s apartment nextto the body of a murdered woman. Startled, he flees the scene – not before rescuing a goldfish he accidentally knocks out of its bowl –and the movie cuts to a jazz singer performing a number appropriate for the milieu of the film. e unexpected actions of a killerrescuing a gasping goldfish alerts the audience to not take everything we see for granted; there is also the notion that sensitivityindicates a degree of heroism, particularly within the urban environment. Berman notes “excessive civilization have made.. modernman with his acute and vibrant senses... a hero,”[8] and both Murdoch and Truman display these qualities; surrounded by the stimuliof modernity, they notice small discrepancies in their environments, which will ultimately allow them to escape. Baudelaire sawmodernity as a driving force for the improvement of man,[9] but both of these films’ environments have an anachronistic quality. Assuch, by revisiting an older period, this is perhaps designed to stop each protagonist from fully becoming a hero, as the environmentis not genuinely modern. However, the jailers in each case have technology from a period further in the future than the era that isevoked within the diegesis, i.e. truly modern rather than “retro.”Flisfeder argues that the retro environment is a form of pastiche; it references various periods from history, but does not link to anyspecific one.[10] It is an evocation rather than specific: “recreations of films that never existed,”[11] so it should perhaps be no surprisethat pastiche unsettles the protagonist and audience – a collage of fragments from different eras, attached to the modern and post-modern, are never homely enough as a simulation of a specific time or place. In exploring their environments, Truman (Figure 6) andMurdoch (Figure 7) notice details that do not add up – messages on the radio from the people in control, buses that never reach thedestination advertised – that suggest their landscapes are artificial. erefore, as well as the implication that their home is some kindof trap, they are also living in locations that are created for the benefit of observers.
Figure 6. Truman finds an exit through the artificial horizon in e Truman Show.
Figure 7. Murdoch finds his path blocked at the edge of the river in Dark City.Truman’s world is the set of a TV show; in Murdoch’s world, the sun never comes up, giving the impression of a genre such as filmnoir, where darkness suits the typical narrative, so daytime is never shown. is illustrates some of Clarke’s notions on “eCinematic City”: “a shift in the field of human perception, one that worked to sensitize people to aspects of the world that hadpreviously gone unnoticed,”[12] cinema can show characters on screen being more acutely aware of the world around them, andenables the audience to be more attuned to such perspicacity.The Cinematic EnvironmentTruman and Murdoch are both audience (seeing the artifice) and protagonist (being able to explore it), with techniques of cinemaenabling and commenting on their extra sensory perception. ese protagonists (Figure 8), and sometimes the antagonists (Figure9), also inhabit the role of the flâneur, wandering through their urban and suburban environment looking for clues to the meaning oflife. Towards the end of their respective narratives Truman and Murdoch act with purpose, believing (correctly) the exit to theirprisons is within their grasp. But earlier in each story, their path is more random, as they are unable to find a route that couldfacilitate their escape. Baudelaire and Benjamin explored the idea of the flâneur as a person who could navigate the complexities of themodern city through wandering, and the idea is still relevant as this type of character still exists in narratives about the modern cityin various media. Benjamin sees the flâneur as having delight in modernity, but who reacts with shock when coming into contact withthe metropolitan masses.[13] In the case of each protagonist in these two films, the hero is either actively stymied by the actions offellow inhabitants or slowed by their lack of interest in their environment.
Figure 8. John Murdoch explores Dark City.
Figure 9. One of the Strangers floats above the tenements in Dark City.Dark City follows other examples such as Alphaville (1965) and Blade Runner (1982), which take tropes from film noir such as “thefemme fatale, the alienated and doomed antihero, and their... feeling of disorientation, pessimism, and the rejection of traditionalfeelings of morality”[14] and mixes these with science-fictional ingredients. Conard also notes that voice-over is a noir convention, andsimilar to Blade Runner, the original release of Dark City begins with narration, as the voice of actor Kiefer Sutherland explains thescenario of the film: “First, there was darkness. en came the Strangers. ey were a race as old as time itself. ey had mastered theultimate technology - the ability to alter physical reality by will alone. ey called this ability ‘Tuning.’” As we hear this, the film showsa crowded city at night with the camera panning down from the sky across a bridge between buildings, recalling a similar scene fromMetropolis. en, at a couple of seconds to midnight, all of the people of the city simultaneously fall asleep.It turns out that all the people of the city are being controlled by the “Strangers,” and only a few collaborators, such as Daniel PoeSchreber (Figure 10), know about the presence of those who control the inhabitants. With such an unusual name, it’s possible thatKiefer Sutherland’s character is named after another Daniel Schreber, a 19th-century German judge, whose book Memoirs of MyNervous Illness was investigated as a case study in psychoanalytic interpretation by Freud after Schreber’s death. As Dalzell explains:“Schreber himself had stated that... an increasing number of deceased souls... were drawn to him when he was experiencing increasednervousness.”[15] e strangers in Dark City are described as being incorporeal aliens who inhabit the bodies of the dead, so as muchas they move humans from one environment to another, they are beings who can move from one body to another.
Figure 10. Daniel Poe Schreber reports to the Strangers in Dark City.Historical ConnectionsAs their human go-between in the film, Sutherland’s character is aptly named after an early documented case of body dysmorphiahaunted by the dead, exemplifying the film’s theme of unreliable identity. e strangers look human but are not; the inhabitants ofthe film act and dress in a certain way, but this can change while they are unconscious. Schreber is given the middle name of Poe, andone might speculate he is named after Edgar Allan Poe, an observer of cities in his fiction. In his story “e Man of the Crowd” (1845),Poe explores the idea of the manifestation of a city, and the idea of a flâneur who observes but does not interact with hissurroundings, much like his namesake in Dark City. Markku Salmela cites this story as a “paradigmatic urban text... a conspicuouslynegative statement on the possibility of American cosmopolitan experience.”[16] is description could also apply to Dark City, whereinhabitants seem unaffected by the alien mechanisms of the city, which prevent coherent travel, and make a person a pauper one dayand a prince the next. e Truman Show takes this satirical potential one step further, suggesting the only inhabitant of the suburbswith any agency is the star of a TV show, and all of the other inhabitants are actors, selling products to their audience.Truman’s full name is worth considering for the associations that both his first name and surname – Burbank – have regarding 20Century American history. Harry S. Truman occupied the White House following the Second World War and oversaw his countryenjoy a rise in prosperity and engage with civil rights in line with UN treaties. It was also a time of communist witch-hunts and fearsof one’s neighbors being secret communists. e film speaks to these notions: Truman enjoys prosperity and freedom, but there is asinister aspect to the fixed smiles of his friends and neighbors. e performances of his neighbors as normal, upright citizensenacting a sit-com lead them to take on traditional roles such as the dutiful wife and his best friend with a blue-collar job. Harry S.Truman’s second term in office coincided with two classic American sitcoms on television: I Love Lucy (1951-1957) and e Adventuresof Ozzie and Harriet (1952-1966). As Spigel notes, these shows “marked the transition to a more naturalistic type of comedy wheregood, clean family normality was the reigning aesthetic,”[17] not to mention aspirational adverts shown during these comedies.Truman Burbank’s adventures represent the middle ground between these styles of sitcom, between “vaudeville performance or... therather mundane.”[18]As Truman’s world evokes 1950s nostalgia, it’s worth noting that Spigel sees “the theatricality of performance” (which Trumanhimself invokes to assert his individuality) at odds with “portraits of everyday life in the white middle-class suburbs.”[19] While hisfirst name might suggest American stability, Truman’s surname perhaps reflects the theatrical nature of his character. Burbank is acity Northeast of Hollywood where various successful movie studios have had their head offices and production facilities since the1920s. So, as a center of media production, the name and location might be considered shorthand for cinematic artifice andentertainment, which Truman finds himself embodying and coming up against.Many films have a protagonist who drives the story forward, and it is perhaps one’s interest in that character’s fate that keeps theaudience watching until the end of the film, to find out if the lead character reaches their goal.[20] ey act as a focalizer, “a means ofopening an imaginary ‘window’ onto the narrative world... to transpose fictional points of view and enter into a state of immersion.”[21] ese “immersions” allow audiences to experience the dreams and visual illusions a character is experiencing, as well as beingguided through the film world by a character they follow (as protagonist) and potentially identify with (via empathy or intrigue). In“pulp” science-fiction like Dark City, it is the “human character through whom the action is focalized”[22] in order to have a normalizedperspective. By using a human narrator, or human focalizer: “the science fictional universe seem(s) much more like a narrativeunfolding in the real world.”[23] Even when a film such as Dark City subverts this idea with a lead character gaining superpowers, theirprevious normalcy is our first encounter with them.Science-Fiction EnvironmentsIn both films, the lead character is trapped by a physical limit: Truman steals a boat, which hits a solid wall at the edge of the TVstudio; Murdoch finds the city is located on a satellite floating in space rather than on Earth (Figure 11).
Figure 11. Breaking through the wall at the edge of Dark City with space beyond.Dark City also shows a plasticity to the buildings where tower blocks become squat tenements that stretch and expand their currentboundaries. is plasticity locates the film within the virtual reality genre that became popular on screen in the 1990s, including suchfilms as e Lawnmower Man (Leonard 1992), e Matrix (Wachowski Brothers 1999) and e irteenth Floor (Rusnak 1999), withthe latter also using noir to inform its environment. Like Murdoch in Dark City who becomes superhuman, protagonist Neo in eMatrix also develops abilities to fly, move objects with his mind, and also manipulate his surroundings. As with mid twentiethcentury escapism offered by films such as e Truman Show and Pleasantville, dark virtual reality narratives offer a different kind ofescapism. While barely a “cycle,” the earliest film mentioned – e Lawnmower Man – arrived in cinemas only a couple of years afterVR machines had a short-lived appearance in arcades,[24] coinciding with public awareness. e idea of the ‘holodeck’, which did notrequire the user to don a special headset, had appeared in many episodes of Star Trek: e Next Generation (1987-1994), including thepilot, and a noir scenario in the holodeck was included in three episodes broadcast in 1988, 1989 and 1991. With films such as BladeRunner and Dark City combining many of the tropes of noir with science-fiction, this allowed narratives to combine the unease andthreat present in the genre with a vision of the near future or alien location.While a city is full of anonymous people, there are still those identified as different, considered a threat to the norm in some respect,particularly when the city is controlled by alien intelligence (where considerations of humanity would be even more regimented thanif controlled by a human or committee). is is something Godard also identified: “Probing further into Alphaville’s way of life, Lemmyponders the way Alpha 60 eliminates ‘foreigners’ who cannot be ‘assimilated’ into the city’s stifling homogeneous life.”[25] If a personis identified as subversive, it makes more sense for that character to be anonymous; identity assembled through other encounterswith other people based on a tabula rasa. Awareness of a different status to others in the urban environment “assures the individualof a type and degree of personal freedom.”[26] Here we see a contrast between Murdoch’s and Truman’s experiences: in the cityMurdoch can enjoy anonymity because of the number of other inhabitants of the metropolitan area. is allows him to go on the runwhen framed for murder, not encounter the policeman on his trail for some time, and pursue his own investigation into the mysteriesof the city. Truman’s suburban environment seems small enough that he knows a greater number of people (and they all know himdue to the conceit of the film) which means individuality becomes more of a performance or act of rebellion. To behave how one likeswhen known by the community is different to behaving oddly in a city where one is unknown. When known by the community, theindividual is rebelling against possible type, when unknown, they are perhaps attempting to be noticed, or prove they have someuniqueness in the crowd.The Audience On ScreenSimmel notes the “reserve” of people trying to assimilate, compared to the risk of upsetting social cohesion due to “the peculiarities ofinner and external development of the individual.”[27] A point arrives in the narrative when Truman is performing the role expectedof him – such as drawing a smiley face on the bathroom mirror in the morning – in order to make people that he is aware aremonitoring him think he is going about his daily routine.e film presents a satirical take on the TV audience: the same characters are shown more than once watching Truman on television,in bars, homes and even in a bath, living their lives vicariously through him. In his forward to Amusing Ourselves to Death, Postmannotes that “Huxley remarked... rationalists who are ever on the alert to oppose tyranny ‘failed to take into account man’s almostinfinite appetite for distractions’... what we love will ruin us.”[28] In contrast, Orwell’s Ministry of Truth allows inhabitants of thestate their distractions in 1984, but only carefully monitored and curated ones, should too much stimulation lead to individuality. Weknow little about the world outside Truman’s cage, but the enormous success of the fictional TV show suggests a population lookingfor a distraction to escape other concerns. Ironically, it is the state of Truman’s captivity that captivates the audience; when heescapes, they lose interest.Ray Pratt sees this desire for projected emotion as a side effect of globalized consumption: “(In) the world capitalist economyeveryone watches American movies and eats American fast food. Such encroaching standardization of human experienceparadoxically also diminishes emotional returns... media culture and mass consumption in general may be used by people to ‘re-enchant’ their lives.”[29] e gap between consumption and emotion narrows with Truman experiencing his “friends” enactingadverts in his home and garden, which seems like aberrant behavior to him, and likely to further his insecurity of what normality is(and therefore normalizes his eccentric mannerisms). Truman’s jailer also projects emotions onto his ward; we see Christof in hispanoptical TV studio stroking a giant image of Truman sleeping (Figure 12), and he seems perplexed that his subject would want toleave (even after trying to kill him with an artificial storm rather than let him escape).
Figure 12: Christof strokes an image of Truman’s sleeping face in e Truman Show.Christof nudges Truman into a paranoid state of not wanting to escape, but this allows Truman to start believing he is in some sortof prison. For Murdoch in Dark City, the jailers can remove warmth, food and a pleasant environment for their prisoners at a whim tosee how it affects them.Conspiracy and ParanoiaRewritten to suit the experiment, Murdoch’s sense of self in unstable in this manipulated city as his role and memory have beenimposed on him to observe the effect. Lack of sunlight recalls James omson’s poem e City of Dreadful Night (1857), whichWilliams sees as having a connotation of “Struggle, indifference, loss of purpose, loss of meaning,”[30] as the city articulates modernconsciousness and “general despair in the isolated observer.”[31] If one imagines a city where light does not penetrate (London slumsof the late nineteenth century, and the deadly smog of the mid twentieth century), then oppressive atmospheres have a deleteriouseffect on the inhabitants.Truman eventually realizes the world is conspiring against him and that he is constantly observed; so he continues to act the way heused to while secretly constructing an escape plan, taking on the behavior of any prison-break movie, behaving normally in front ofthe jailers while digging a tunnel at night. Research published in the journal Surveillance & Society[32] notes the proliferation of closed-circuit television in British cities in response to such tragedies as the Conservative Conference Party bombing in 1984 and the deathof Jamie Bulger in 1993. However, proliferation of surveillance also makes the constantly surveilled feel paranoid. Pratt notes: “(T)hetwenty-first century... feeds off the paranoia and fear the total surveillance society now makes possible,”[33] with this surveillancesociety informing such films as e Net (Winkler 1995), e Game (Fincher 1997) and Enemy of the State (Scott 1998). is shows atrend for surveillance narratives on screen, which may fuel fears of paranoia in the audience, when they are presented with scenariosconfirming their worst fears.For Truman it is the surveillance that is Orwellian, while Dark City presents us with a scenario where entire lives of people aremanipulated for an experiment. Titles given to e Strangers – Mr. Hand, Mr. Book, Mr. Wall etc. – plus their interest inmanipulating people’s lives, personalities, social status and relationships recall the activities of the Ministry of Truth and the oughtPolice in 1984. Orwell has the state rewriting history – by altering documents and photographs – and giving people electroshocktherapy to change their behavior. By controlling what books people can read (as well as redacting their contents), and by allowingthem to watch only curated content on screens, the state modifies behavior. When people accept the reality around them as “truth,”there is the expectation that they might change their behavior – so if an increase in the price of chocolate is “revealed” to be adiscount, for example, the people will be pleased rather than disappointed. e difference between sleep and wakefulness is thin inDark City; when people go to sleep in one version of reality and wake in a different one, they accept the new reality the same way adreamer might accept the change in narrative in a dream.Further to the revision of history and reality, the manipulation of the population of Dark City is an extrapolation of a thoughtexperiment postulated by John Rawls in A eory of Justice. Rawls suggested that if everyone in a society had their notions of socialstatus, of hierarchy compared to others, of difference of race or gender removed, then this might eliminate crime, criminal behaviorand injustice, because artificially perceived differences – imposed on our sense of self by society – cause aberrant behavior. “(M)enborn into different positions have different expectations of life determined, in part, by the political system as well as by economic andsocial circumstances.”[34] Perhaps this is part of the expected behavior of people living in cities, as noted by Simmel, but forinhabitants of Dark City it goes one stage further, collective amnesia due to their constant mind-wipes limits their overall knowledge.Suffice to say this enforced amnesia adds to the sense of characters’ ambiguity, status and unreliability.Unreliable MemoriesMurdoch has hazy memories of his childhood holiday destination Shell Beach, but whenever he asks other residents of the city aboutit, their memory is even vaguer than his. e place has become a collective dream, but the lack of a consensus of the location by thecity folk, leads to no surprise that when Murdoch finally reaches the point on the map where he expects it to be, it is just a poster on awall. e actuality of a beach in a nocturnal city of cars, commuters and crowded tenements would be too incongruous amongst thetopology of what we’ve seen so far. Also, printed documents do not necessarily convey truth; as mentioned earlier, the state in 1984changes information in reprints, to make people doubt their own memories. In Blade Runner, the replicants wonder if photographsare of their own remembered experiences, or someone else’s, as a method of convincing them of the truth. As in Dark City when alocal cannot recall the location that the poster is advertising, in Blade Runner: the “photograph, it seems, has proved nothing.”[35]In her writing on “prosthetic memory,” Landsberg discusses the connections between memory and identity, and how speculativefiction offers characters memories that are not their own, but still this informs characters’ behavior and actions: “memories are lessabout validating or authenticating the past than they are about organizing the present and constructing strategies with which onemight imagine a liveable future.”[36] We can see this at work in Dark City: while Murdoch finds it difficult to reconcile his lack ofmemory of seemingly killing a prostitute, other characters are ambivalent about not being able to recall, for example, the location of apopular sea resort. eir actions are orientated to the eternal present; their past is always in flux, at least as far as it might reside intheir memories, so they “just get on with it” rather than worrying about memories that might offer a past that is at odds with theirpresent. is also sets Murdoch apart from his peers: he actively resists the present he finds himself in, as it makes no sense based onhis distorted memories of the past, and amnesia of recent times.To encapsulate the unusual manipulation that informs the films I am examining, they can be summarized each in a sentence. DarkCity shows that people in a (cinematic) city can be shifted around regarding their way of life and social status for experimentalpurposes. e Truman Show treats suburbia as a stage for entertainment of the masses, where one’s family can be ejected from society,PrintShare+
purposes. e Truman Show treats suburbia as a stage for entertainment of the masses, where one’s family can be ejected from society,and friends are actually employed to sell products in the narrative. ese films feature protagonists with lives disrupted by forcesbeyond their control, which leads to destabilizations of their identity and sense of self. As Lebow notes: “science fiction has come tomirror debates in society... often with the goal of exploring what it means to be human.”[37] As such, these films hold a mirror up tovarious concerns present in society at the time of their making, plus concerns about the future, and notions of repeating the past,including fears of surveillance and simulations. Concerns about mental illnesses or people transgressing societal roles and agreedlocations are also present, and many of these concerns are amplified by the city location. ese films show that city and suburbiaallow for anonymity or fame, but this is compromised when one is famous either for being a TV star, or for being pursued by theforces of law and order. One’s sense of self is also compromised by leaving one’s supposed routine, so that enough experience canmanifest a heroic alter-ego. A human identity becomes unreliable when a character embraces the superhero within in, or fame (eitherlocally or through surveillance) itself can be abandoned by escaping that environment.Whether TV show star or framed murderer, their characters display an unusual mental outlook and our experience of them isthrough the lens of their being damaged individuals, through the stresses of their urban/suburban lives. Truman displays signs ofmania, dissociative disorder and paranoia, Murdoch has amnesia when we first encounter him and again, doggedly pursues “thetruth” in an obsessive way. Berger notes that: “Urban residents, especially those in large cities, do appear to be admitted to mentalinstitutions at a higher rate that do residents of small cities or rural areas... In fact there is a tendency for manic-depressive patients toreside in urban areas of high economic status.”[38] e urban environment has a number of qualities that might damage the psyche ofinhabitants – pollution, over-crowding, claustrophobia – and Dark City exaggerates these qualities, through lack of daylight and thedecay of the infrastructure, walls that actually enclose you as you sleep.In Dark City and e Truman Show, the lead character is unreliable as they have been lied to for as long as they can remember, so anytruth they tell is based on fallacies. Both environments that they live in have been created with an ulterior motive. ey have beentold lies in order to shape their identities – Truman has been told that actors are blood relatives, Murdoch’s neighbors have been givena multitude of different lives and identities as the history of their environment has been shaped. Pratt’s comments on how“standardized... human experience... diminishes emotional returns” which e Truman Show reflects on, suggests a belittling of identityin the face of homogeneity – especially in the kitsch every-town Truman lives in. Also, the world Dark City presents is a massremembered fiction (of film noir) turned into a real environment, but living in a city one step removed from fiction means the detailsare not filled in – no-one knows where Shell Beach is – and this is unsettling to the residents.Is it worth attempting to modify the... homogeneous patterns of urban development in order to obtain diversity? ...Diversity is the best assurance a community has that it will be able to minimize crises... In contrast, overspecializedcities controlled by dominant groups are subject to periodic crises owing to their unbalanced concentration of power.[39]Lozano questions the status of both a bland city and a stylized one, and in the case of these two films a bland conurbation and astylized city are places one has to escape in order to find the reality of one’s identity, no longer controlled by homogeneity or thedesigns of others. e environment of Dark City is smoggy, smoky, and perennially dark. is is a dehumanizing environment whereone struggles to make human connections and not suffer from vitamin D deficiency. In contrast in Truman’s suburban environment,the trope of neighbor familiarity becomes stifling and one is expected to assume the role society has given. In both cases, theprotagonists want to escape this cage, and the dehumanizing of one’s character that this has entailed.EscapeIn these films, there is at least a happy ending, albeit unresolved. Murdoch gets to witness a sunny day (Figure 13) – still trapped onthe asteroid, but now master of his own fate. Truman escapes the TV studio to the world outside (Figure 14), and to the possibility ofa genuine relationship.
Figure 13. Murdoch explores a new landscape beyond the outside wall of Dark City.
Figure 14. Truman takes his final bow before leaving the set of e Truman Show.Other examples of the trope (of characters with a messianic purpose trapped in a science-fictional environment) might lead tomadness and death – 1984, Brazil, Twelve Monkeys – or sequels that reduce the message of the initial instalments – such as the secondand third Matrix films and multiple Terminator sequels. ere are reflections of multiple worlds on offer: Truman is observed by botha control center (whose occupants manipulate his world) and a TV audience (who through scale of numbers, ensure his continuedincarceration). Truman’s environment is a fiction in a film, so the film’s audience watch the fictional TV show’s audience watchingTruman – we make judgments on them, when we ourselves are enjoying the fictionalized world presented to us.e idea that there is a truth behind the world is a common denouement in science fiction and fantasy – Murdoch discovers his city isfloating in space, Truman finds he is in a TV studio, Murdoch discovers his life is controlled by aliens, Truman finds his is controlledby a TV director. is recalls the ending of e Wizard of Oz (1939) where the wizard is revealed to be a huckster, creating artificial“sturm und drang,” and the protagonist can leave the (dream) world through simple ritual. Truman also leaves a fantasy for “the realworld,” but Murdoch choses to create a new fantasy that is more to his liking than the one created by others. While this seems like arejection of reality, it is at least a happy ending. Presented with monochrome Kansas, and the Great Depression, Dorothy might havebeen happier in Oz (and indeed the book serial depicts such returns).Both e Truman Show and Dark City come from a decade of CCTV proliferation and the rise of reality television. ey comment onhow, in a world of constant observation and manipulation, changing your status according to the whims of society, or being subjectedto subliminal advertising, might shape the personalities of individuals, and whether this might cause certain members of society toflee or react against this environment. e films also combine concerns about city life and incarceration that have occupied writers forgenerations. ey update fears about life under surveillance, made bearable by facile entertainment as predicted by Orwell andHuxley, and utilize ideas of urban wandering and incarceration as explored by Baudelaire and Bentham. ey are useful examples offin-de-siècle science fiction, which follow tropes and genres that developed in the 1980s and 1990s and, viewed 20 years on, containideas and provocations that are a worthwhile consideration of the human state in cities and suburbs under surveillance.Author BiographyAlex Fitch is pursuing a PhD in Comics and Architecture at the University of Brighton. He presents a a pair of monthly radio shows -one ("Panel Borders") on the subject of comics, and another on "Architecture Culture" - on Resonance FM, the Arts Council RadioStation in London. He has written on the topic of film in anthologies published by University of Chicago Press, University Press ofMississippi, Intellect Books, and Strange Attractor Press.Notes1. Georg Simmel and Donald Levine (editor), On Individuality and Social Forms (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971), 325.
2. Gary Bridge and Sophie Watson, e Blackwell City Reader (New Jersey: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010), 105.
3. Janet Semple. Bentham's Prison: A Study of the Panopticon Penitentiary (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993).
4. Margaret De Lacy, Prison Reform in Lancashire, 1700–1850: A Study in Local Administration (Manchester: Manchester UniversityPress, 1986), 174.
5. Mônica Mesquita, Sal Restivo, Ubiratan D’ Ambrosio, Asphalt Children and City Streets (Berlin: Springer, 2012), 29.
6. Lynn Spigel, Welcome to the Dreamhouse: Popular Media and Postwar Suburbs (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2001), 5.
7. Ibid.
8. Marshall Berman, All that is Solid Melts Into Air: e Experience of Modernity (New York: Verso, 1983), 132.
9. Ibid, 133.
10. Matthew Flisfeder, Postmodern eory and Blade Runner (London: Bloomsbury, 2017), 71.
11. Ibid.
12. David B. Clarke, e Cinematic City (Abingdon-on-ames: Psychology Press, 1997), 2.
13. Walter Benjamin, Early Writings (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 2011), 161-4.
14. Mark T. Conard, and Robert Porfirio, e Philosophy of Film Noir. (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2007), 7.
15. Tom Dalzell, Freud's Schreber Between Psychiatry and Psychoanalysis: On Subjective Disposition to Psychosis. (Abingdon-on-ames:Routledge, 2018), 269.
16. Jeremy Tambling, e Palgrave Handbook of Literature and the City. (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017), 283.
17. Lynn Spigel, Make Room for TV: Television and the Family Ideal in Postwar America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013),177.
18. Ibid.
19. Ibid, 178.
20. David Bordwell, Janet Staiger, and Kristin ompson, e Classical Hollywood Cinema: Film Style and Mode of Production to 1960(Abingdon-on-ames: Routledge, 2003), 272.
21. David Herman, Manfred Jahn, and Marie-Laure Ryan, Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative eory (Abingdon-on-ames:Routledge, 2008), 175.
22. Peter Stockwell. e Poetics of Science Fiction (Abingdon-on-ames: Routledge, 2014), 83.
23. Ibid, 84.
24. Karen Carr, and Rupert England, Simulated and Virtual Realities: Elements of Perception. (Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995), 72.
25. David Sterritt. e Films of Jean-Luc Godard: Seeing the Invisible (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 12.
26. Bridge and Watson, e Blackwell City Reader, 106.
27. Ibid.
28. Neil Postman, Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business (London: Penguin, 2005), foreword.
29. Ray Pratt, Projecting Paranoia: Conspiratorial Visions in American Film (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2001), 247.
30. Raymond Williams, e Country and the City (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975), 239.
31. Ibid, 240.
32. Clive Norris, Mike McCahill, and David Wood. "e Politics of CCTV in Europe and Beyond" in Surveillance & Society 2 (2-3):110-135 (Ontario: Queen’s University, 2004). https://doi.org/10.24908/ss.v2i2/3.3369
33. Pratt, Projecting Paranoia, 247.
34. John Rawls, A eory of Justice. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009), 7.
35. Alison Landsberg. Prosthetic Memory: e Transformation of American Remembrance in the Age of Mass Culture (New York:Columbia University Press, 2004), 40.
36. Alison Landsberg. "Prosthetic Memory: Total Recall and Blade Runner" in Body & Society 1 (3-4): 176. (ousand Oaks: SAGE,1995). https://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X95001003010
37. Richard Ned Lebrow, e Politics and Ethics of Identity: In Search of Ourselves (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 244.
38. Alan S Berger, e City: Urban Communities and eir Problems (Iowa: Brown, 2012), 353.
39. Eduardo E. Lozano, Community Design and the Culture of Cities: e Crossroad and the Wall (Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress, 1990), 144.
TOP OF PAGE
Hosted by Michigan Publishing, a division of the University of Michigan Library.For more information please contact mpub-help@umich.edu.Print ISSN: 0163-5069 • Online ISSN: 2471-4364
