Truman_Show_Academic
In repo

Journal of Religion & Film Journal of Religion & Film
Volume 23
Issue 1 April 2019 Article 48
April 2019
Of God, Humanity , and the W orld: Reflections on "The T ruman Of God, Humanity , and the W orld: Reflections on "The T ruman
Show" Show"
Rober t S. Gall
West Liber ty Univ ersity , rgall@westliber ty.edu
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f
Part of the Religious Thought, Theology and Philosophy of Religion Commons
Please tak e our f eedback sur vey at: https:/ /unomaha.az1.qualtrics.com/jf e/form/
SV_8cchtFmpDyGfBLE
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Gall, Rober t S. (2019) "Of God, Humanity , and the W orld: Reflections on "The T ruman Show", " Journal of
Religion & Film : Vol. 23: Iss. 1, Ar ticle 48.
DOI: https:/ /doi.or g/10.32873/uno.dc.jr f.23.01.48
Available at: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f/vol23/iss1/48
This Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y
DigitalCommons@UNO . It has been accepted for
inclusion in Journal of Religion & Film b y an authoriz ed
editor of DigitalCommons@UNO . For mor e information,
please contact unodigitalcommons@unomaha.edu .
Of God, Humanity , and the W orld: Reflections on "The T ruman Show" Of God, Humanity , and the W orld: Reflections on "The T ruman Show"
Abstr act Abstr act
Popular analysis of The T ruman Show gener ally has focused on the comments the mo vie is making about
our media cultur e and corpor ate influence in our liv es. Howe ver, as the names of the lead char acters
(Truman, Christ of) suggest, ther e is mor e to the mo vie than a critique of corpor ate media cultur e. With
echoes of st ories of the Gar den of E den, the Book of Job, and pr omises of hea ven, the mo vie raises
inter esting and tr oubling questions about the natur e of God and his r elation t o humanity in the W estern
tradition. With echoes of Descar tes’ “ evil genius” and how we come t o know ourselv es, each other and the
world, the mo vie also addr esses some fundamental assumptions of modern philosophy . The answers
provided b y the mo vie show that The T ruman Show is a r adical critique of commonly held assumptions
about God, humanity and the world in which we liv e.
Keywor ds Keywor ds
God, Hea ven, Human Beings, W orld
Creativ e Commons License Creativ e Commons License
This work is licensed under a Creativ e Commons A ttribution 4.0 License .
Author Notes Author Notes
Rober t S. Gall is Pr ofessor of Philosophy and Religion at W est Liber ty Univ ersity in W est Liber ty, WV. He
specializ es in philosophy of r eligion and 19th and 20th centur y European philosophy , par ticularly the
thought of Mar tin Heidegger . PDF was par tially r emediated t o meet WCA G standar ds and r e-uploaded 4/
30/2026
This ar ticle is a vailable in Journal of Religion & Film: https:/ /digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jr f/vol23/iss1/48
Popular analysis of the 1998 movie The Truman Show generally has focused
on the comments the movie is making about our media culture and corporate influ-
ence in our lives. This is understandable. The movie depicts the production of a
television program that is watched around the world by millions and has become
culturally ubiquitous, including its own product line and “The Best of The Truman
Show ” videos. Its “star” has been legally adopted by a corporation that “runs” his
life. The ironic references to television and its hold on our lives are endless.
However, there are other domains of meaning in this story. The name “Tru-
man” suggests that Truman Burbank may somehow represent the “true man” or
“true human.” He lives his life in Seahaven, an almost paradisiac “heaven” on
earth. We learn in the cours e of the movie of the existence of Christof, the creator
of the television show in which Truman is the star. As his name suggests, Christof
has been anointed/ordained to look after Truman and thus serves as a kind of savior;
Truman was an unwanted child w ho has been “saved ” by being legally adopted by
the Omnicam Corporation for which Christof works. In other words, The Truman
Show seems to be not onl y about our media culture but —consciously or not —an
allegorical tale that challenges many of our tradition al Western religious ideas
about God, humanity and our place in the cosmos. It is those philosophical and
religious issues that will be explored in the following essay.
1Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
The Story
After some preliminary remarks from characters we will come to know dur-
ing the movie, the story of The Truman Show begins with Truman leaving his home
to go to work. Some odd light fixture (labeled “Sirius”) nearly falls on him. This
falling star, explained on the car radio as the result of an aircraft shedding parts as
it flew over Seahaven, is the appropriate beginning for a story that is driven by
questioning and unsettledness. We find that Truman is vaguely dissatisfied with
his life. This dissatisfaction evolves into skepticism about his wor ld through a se-
ries of events : a sighting of his supposedly long dead father, glimpses behind the
facade of staged sets that have been constructed around him, rain that falls only on
him while he sits on the beach, the choreography of vehicles that pass his house.
His suspicions gro w as events seem to be designed to imprison him in the world of
Seahaven: he is unable to book a flight to Fiji, a bus to Chicago which he boards
suddenly has mechanical failure, his attempt to drive off the island is thwarted by a
nuclear power plant cris is. All the while we are given insights into the worl d out-
side the huge sound stage —the Omnic am Ecosphere —in which Truman’s life and
show unfold. We see people watching Truman’s show o n television around the
world —at home, at work, in bars, and in the co ntrol room from which Christof and
his heavenly court direct the show. There are Truman Show fan clubs as well as a
group that protests the show, led by Sylvia, a former cast member in the show who
was tempted to reveal the truth to Truman while she was o n the show. Eventually,
2Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
after his television wife has left him, Truman is able briefly to evade the five thou-
sand cameras that watch him and set s out on the sea in a sailboat in an effort to
escape Seahaven. Despite Christof’s best efforts to get him to turn back, Truman
comes to the “end of the worl d”—the wall of the Ecosphere. A climactic dialogue
between Christof and Truman is then a prelude to Truman’s exit from the Eco-
sphere, to the cheers of his fans watching on TV. Omnicam stops broadcasting the
show; it is over (except for the thirty years of reruns available).
Christof : A Disturb ing God
You know when I sit down and when I rise up; you discern my thoughts from far away. You search
out my path and my lying down, and are acquainted with all my ways... You hem me in, behind and
before, and lay your hand upon me.
Psalm 139:2 -4, 5 (NRSV)
The figure of Christof is complex, even paradoxical. As the movie devel-
ops, a range of characteristics —characteristics commonly used in the West in ref-
erence to God —emerge to define him. On the one hand, as already noted, Christof
is something of a savior f igure (“Christ of”), since Truman was an unwanted child
and “saved” from abandonment by Christof and Omnicam. This is not to say that
Christof is a Christ -figure —at least not in any straightforward sense.1 The visual
in the movie that zooms into the sky to reveal Christof peering out on Seah aven
from the moon as he orchestrates the “resurrection” of Truman’s father reminds
us—intentionally or not —of all those Christ -as-Pantocrator or Christ -as-Almighty
3Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
mosaics and paintings in the domed ceilings of church es and basilicas: calm, all -
seeing, all -knowing , all-powerful .2 The imagery suggests that i f Christof is Christ ,
it is Christ as the Almighty, Yahweh, El Shaddai , God .3 The identification of Chris-
tof with God is reinforced in various ways in the movie. Like the God of our Abra-
hamic religious traditions , Christof cares for Truman. This is so in a general sense
insofar as he has creat ed an entire world for Truman, a world in which he is safe
and secure and given a family, friends, a wife, and a job. It is a world in which
Christof provides Truman with order, from the routine and regularity of Truman’s
life to explanations for any apparent anomalies in this world. In addition, m ore
specifically, two scenes in the movie particularly impress upon us that Christof is
caught up in Truman’s life on some personal level . At one point in the movie,
Christof approaches a giant television screen in the studio that is showing Truman
while he sleeps. Christof approaches the screen gingerly an d puts his hand out to
touch Truman’s face, the way a father might while watching his child sleep (82).4
Later, near the climax of the movie, when Christof addresses Truman, he takes a
small monitor showing Truman and places it on his lap , and leans down to embrace
it, the way a father might put his son up on his lap to tell him something important.
The ensuing monologue has Christof fondly remembering Truman’s life and the
important events in it (106). In the end, Truman is central to Christof’s life: h e lives
in the studio of the Omnicam Ecosphere nearly twenty -four hours a day to watch
4Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
over Truman and take care of his needs. In short, Christof shows some sort of
caring, personal attachment to Truman.
Yet there is more to Christof. The opening credit s of the movie/television
show tell us that it was “created by Christof”; an interviewer later calls him a “tel-
evision ary, the Man -in-the-Moon himself” (72). That latter reference notes the fact
that Christof oversees the giant set that is Truman’s world from the “Lunar Room”
221 stories up in a window on the world of Seahaven and its surroundings. Thus
Christof is credited with another set of characteristics also associated with Western
religious conceptions of God that coalesce around vision and the uni que properties
of seeing. Sight, Hans Jonas has noted,5 is the sense of simultaneity, tending to
elevate the static over the dynamic, the fixed over the ephemeral, and thereby gives
birth to the idea of the eternal. So, under the ever -present gaze of Chr istof, despite
all the action, things do not change all that much in The Truman Show —or outside
it, for that matter. On the show, Truman’s life is usually rather routine, even down
to the way he begins his day greeting the neighbors, stopping to buy women ’s mag-
azines and being approached by a pair of brothers who are considering buying in-
surance from him. Confirming the stasis of life in this world, his grade school
teacher tells him that there is really nothing left to explore (6), i.e., everything is
fixed and complete. Truman himself, answering a question about how he is, says
“Inhale ... exhale ... same old thing” (83). Outside of the show, things do not seem
to change all that much either. The film cuts to the same people watching The
5Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
Truman Show day and night: the same bartenders and bar patrons, the same man
in a bath tub, the same two garage attendants, the same senior citizens, the same
Japanese family . In watching the show, its viewers become trans fixed and unchang-
ing.
Furthermore , as Jonas o bserves, sight helps to create the polarity of subject
and object. Vision tends to turn what it sees into an object and to suppress the link
between subject and object as the viewer is detached from the object of one’s gaze.
Hence we are not surprised wh en Christof explains during an interview that he has
never been tempted to do a cameo on the show because he wants to retain his ob-
jectivity and not get emotionally caught up in Truman’s life (79). That objectiv-
ity—even indifference —is confirmed near the end of the movie as Christof threat-
ens Truman’s life in an attempt to keep Truman from escaping the Ecosphere. Fi-
nally, Jonas notes that the distance and detachment of vision empowers, for one is
allowed to see ahead. Vision enables foresight and forekno wledge. Hence Christof
can claim from his vantage point on high to know Truman better than Truman
knows himself (106). His vision gives him power because it gives him for e-
knowledge of what will happen. H e is thereby able to foresee and thwart any at-
tempt by Truman to leave the Ecosphere.
The movie’s emphasis on the visual characteristics of Christof suggests that,
no matter how much he seems to care for Truman, there is something dark and
sinister abou t him. There is something manipulative, distant and uncaring in the
6Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
vision, in the gaze, of Christof —and in the millions of TV viewers who, made in
the image of Christof, keep watch over Truman. He reminds us of Descartes’ evil
genius in Meditations I : “supremely powerful and clever,” directing “his entire ef-
fort at deceiving” Truman.6 He works to provide Truman with “logical ” explana-
tions for apparent anomalies in his world that might lead Truman to question his
world, and moves to oust anyone from this “paradise” that seeks to bring Truman
knowledge. Near the end of the movie, h e even seems willing to kill Truman rather
than allow Truman to escape.
It is as if Christof’s gaze imprisons Truman. Indeed, the Ecosphere is rem-
iniscent of Jeremy Bentham’s ideal prison —the Panopticon —in which prisoners
are constantly watched by an unseen warden. One function of the Panopticon, ac-
cording to Michel Foucault, is to dissociate “the see/being seen dyad: in the pe-
ripheric ring, one is totally seen, without ever s eeing; in the central tower, one sees
everything without ever being seen.”7 And, of course, Christof himself is largely
unseen —and never seen by Truman; he is a mysterious figure to both Truman and
the TV/movie viewer. We see him at the very beginning of the movie, though we
do not know who he is, telling us about Truman’s “authenticity. ” But other than
that, we do not encounter Christof until nearly one hour (more than halfway
through) into the story, as he choreographs the “resurrection” of Truman’s “f ather,”
Kirk Burbank.8 Truman will not learn of Christof until the end of the story, and
still never sees him. To Truman, the ways of Christof truly are mysterious.
7Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
However, in this way Truman is controlled and disciplined. As Foucault
further notes:
Disciplinary power ... is exercised throug h its invisibility; at the
same time, it imposes on those whom it subjects a principle of com-
pulsory visibility. In discipline, it is the subjects who have to be
seen. Their visibility assures the hold of the po wer that is exercised
over them. It is the fact of being constantly seen, of being able al-
ways to be seen, that maintains the disciplined individual in his sub-
jection .9
How is being seen a kind of discipline and manipulation? Recall Sartre’s “ocular-
phobia” in Being and Nothingness , his sense that to be watched robs one of one’s
possibilities : “I grasp the Other’s look at the very center of my act as the solidifi-
cation and alienation of my own possibilities. ... The Other as a look is only that —
my transc endence transcended. ..”10 In other words, Truman’s possibilities —past,
present, and future —are at the service of Christof and his plans. Or, as Jacques -
Alain Miller explains, the Panopticon
is the temple of reason, a temple luminous and transparent in every
sense: first because there are no shadows and nowhere to hide: it is
open to constant surveillance by the invisible eye; but also, because
totalitarian mastery of the environment excludes everything irra-
tional: no opacity can withstand logic.11
Indee d, in the Ecosphere, “there are no shadows and nowhere to hide.” Christof is
even able to defy the laws of nature by having the sun rise too early when Truman
“disappears” and must be found (94 -95). Christof’s logic and order excludes Sylvia
and anyone e lse who would inform Truman of his situation, excludes the possibility
of Truman leaving and striking out on his own, excludes everything that he has not
8Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
framed and placed and set before him in the Ecosphere.12 Just as “the Panopticon,
with its hidden and invisible warden , was an architectural embodiment of the most
paranoid Sartrean fantasies about the ‘absolute look’,” in which “the disciplining
and normalizing function of the gaze was at its most blatant ,”13 so is the Ecosphere.
In short, despite Christo f’s suggestions that Truman is free,14 Christof’s omnisci-
ence, his super -vision , amounts to the supervision, objectification and reduct ion of
Truman’s possibilities —and of Truman himself.
The notion of God as a panoptic spectator empowered by his gaze and di-
recting what happens in the world contrasts sharply wit h the notion of a benevolent,
personal God. It appears that i f God is omniscient and omnipotent , then he is not
omnibenevolent but controlling and manipulative. On the other hand, if God is
“persona l” in some fashion, he cannot be omnipotent and omniscient. We get an
illustration of this at the end of the movie, whe n Christof finally do es approach
Truman in something like a personal way —by speaking to and with Truman . In
this situation, Christof loses his omnipotence and omniscience . He seems incapable
of stopping Truman from leaving and does not know what Truman will say or do .
He then is amazed when Truman exits the Ecosphere.
What are we to make of this paradox? Some have tried to account for the
contrasting characterizations of God in our Western religious traditions by noting
that they correspond to the Greek emphasis on vision and the Hebrew emphasis on
the word.15 However, as should be apparent from the epigram from the Psalms that
9Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
began th is section of our paper —as well as other references that may be found in
the Hebrew Bible16—this contrast is not simply one of Greek and Hebrew under-
standings of divinity. Jewish, Christian and Islamic imagery of God mixes the per-
sonal and the transcendent . The character of Christof in The Truman Show embod-
ies that mix , and shows us the paradox and disturb ing consequences of that mix .
Given that Truman ultimately takes leave of Christof and his world , The Truman
Show offers up an anti -theist view of the w orld, based in part on the paradoxical
(some might even say incoheren t) Western religious concept of God.
Truman : Paradigm for Humanity
Many are the wonders, none/ is more wonderful than what is man. / This it is that crosses the sea
/... He has a way against everything, / and he faces nothing that is to come/ without contrivance/ ...
With some sort of cunning, inventive/ beyond all expectation/ he reaches sometimes evil, / and
sometimes good.
Sophoc les, Antigone , 332ff 17
As his name suggests, Truman represents the “true man,” i.e., human beings
in general, humanity.18 However, as such, his character as the “true man” of the
story is initially ambiguous ; the movie and its characters suggest a number of ways
in which we might understan d how he is a true human being. Coming from our
predominantly Christian culture, we initially might be inclined to see Truman as a
Christ -figure , that is, a fictional character who resembles Jesus in a significant way,
10Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
particularly as a redeemer or savior . Indeed, Truman does have a number of char-
acteristics that scholars associate with Christ -figures in film.19 He is 30 years old,
the focus of a show that, as Christof says, “gives hope and joy and inspiration to
millio ns” (105) , with a cult following all across the world . There also are a few
visual cues in the movie that might remind us of Christ. While out on the “sea” and
ravaged by the storm Christof has unleashed on him, Truman lashes himself to the
wheel of his boat in a cruciform position (though how he lashes himself to the wheel
is not indicated in the shooting script; 101) and momentarily appears to have
drowned, onl y to rouse himself (as if he had died and been resurrected ). A few
minutes later, once he has come to the wall of the Ecosphere, Truman walks along
a walkway, giving us the visual impression that he is walking on water (as Jesus
did in the Gospels ; Matthew 14:22 -36, Mark 6:45 -56, John 6:16 -24). Finally, he
comes to a staircase which he climbs into the “heavens ” toward the exit of the Eco-
sphere (just as Jesus ascended into heaven ; Acts 1:9 -11). So, to some, Truman
might be the “true man” as Jesus Ch rist is, according to St. Paul (I Corinthians
15:45 ), the 2nd Adam meant to serve as a new model for humanity.
However, interpreting Truman as a Ch rist-figure seems strained . First of
all, he lac ks many if not most of the characteristics associated with Christ -figures.
Granted, those who have catalogued characte ristics of Christ -figures in the movies
do not argue that a Christ -figure must have all the characteristics they list . So, the
fact that there is no Mary Magdalene -like figure in the movie and Truman is not
11Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
dressed like Je sus (either physically or spiritu ally) or have blue eyes would not rule
him out as a Christ -figure . Truman, though, lacks other, seemingly more essential
characteristics of a Christ -figure . For instance, Truman shows no sign of meeting
the first of Reinhartz’s two sufficient conditions : that the character “extends him
or herself on behalf of another .” Relatedly , Truman does not sacrific e himself for
others or provide service to others (at least not knowingly), which are two of
Koslovic’s criteria. Truman is not an outsider (like the ti tle character of Cool Hand
Luke ) and does not have mysterious or alien origins (like Superman and E.T., or
Klaatu in The Day the Earth Stood Still ), nor does he have special and extraordinary
abilities while appearing normal (again, Klaatu and Superman are good examples ,
as well as John Coffey in The Green Mile ). Though he has a large following he is
hardly charismatic in the way cinematic Christ -figures are —by being outsiders, re-
bels, or aliens with special powers. He does not show a c ommitment to justice (like
Superm an), nor does he try to redeem or save anybody —except perhaps himself .
He does not even have the obvious J.C. initials (like John Coffey in The Green
Mile, James Cole in Twelve Monkeys , or John Connor in The Terminator ). Indeed,
as noted above, the only allusion to a “Chris” in the movie is Christof (who, as
argued above, is God Almighty in our allegorical reading of the movie) . On the
other hand, Truman seems positively un -Christ -like in defying Christof by tryin g
to escape from the Ecosphere, whereas Christ was obedient , even unto death . For
12Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
these reasons, it seems we would do well to look elsewhere for how Truman is the
“true man.”
One complex of meanings is provided by Christof. Answering an attack on
the show b y a caller during his interview, Christof claims
He can leave at any time. If his was more than just a vague ambition,
if he were absolutely determined to discover the truth, there’s no
way we could prevent him. I think what really distresses you, Caller ,
is that ultimately Truman prefers the comfort of his “cell” as you
call it (81).
Christof reaffirms this view toward the end of the movie when, trying to keep Tru-
man from leaving, he says “he’s not willing to risk his life. His doubts will turn
him bac k” (100). Thus Truman appears “true” in the sense that , like all human
beings, he fears chaos (shown to us, e.g., in his paralyzing fear of t he sea) and craves
the security . (It is somewhat ironic that Truman is an insurance salesman.) That
desire for s ecurity presumably includes “blissful ignorance,” since Christof even
suggests that this “true man” really does not wish to know about himself and his
world. “We accept the reality of the world with which we are presented. It is as
simple as that” says C hristof (79) in answer to an interviewer’s question. What
Christof is suggesting is that, like Adam (and Eve) in the Book of Genesis, Truman
is unaware of his “nakedness,” that is, unaware of his weakness and neediness and
his dependence upon the A lmighty Christof.20 Such is the nature of the true man
in paradise, before his “fall.”
13Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
This is connected to another characterization of Truman given by Christof
in the opening remarks of the movie:
We have become bored with actors giving us phony emotions.
We’re tired of pyrotechnics and special effects. While the world he
inhabits is in some respects counterfeit, there is nothing fake about
Truman himself. No scripts, no cue cards. It isn’t always Shake-
speare, but it’s genuine. It’s a life.21
Christof w ould have us believe that Truman is “true” in the sense that he is not
acting, that his responses to variou s situations are not s cripted: he is presumably
an island of authenticity in an illusory world. Louis Coltrane, who plays Truman’s
best friend Marl on, reinforces this view when he says in an interview at the begin-
ning of the movie that “It’s all true, it’s all real. Nothing here is fake. Nothing you
see in this show is fake. It’s merely controlled.” However, the movie undercuts
that interpretation as we find that Truman is made in Christof’s image, i.e., is ma-
nipulated and hemmed in, directed in one way or another. Christof inadvertently
admits this (and thereby contradict s himself) when he notes that: “As the Bard says,
‘All the world’s a stage, and all the men and women merely players.’ ... He [Tru-
man] plays h is allotted roles as we all do —” (80).
Yet, interestingly, there is one way in which Truman is not made in Chris-
tof’s image: he does not watch television. Indeed, it is si gnificant that Tr uman
wises up —comes to know that he doe s not know his world or himself —as he real-
izes the artifice of what he sees (e.g., the hollow sets, the regularity of the vehicles
that pass by his house, that the sky is literally the limit of this world) and after
14Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
hearing from Christof. Seeing, he realizes, is not believing, leading him to question
everything he knows.
This seems to be the direction in which the movie finally wants to take us:
to an understanding of the true human being as one who eventually questi ons and
thereby opens themselves to possibilities. By this we do not mean the sort of mod-
ern skepticism that doubts for the sake of doubting or doubts, like Descartes, in
order to acquire some fundamentum inconcussum (including religious faith) on
which o ne can build a knowledge of the world that is certain and unshakeab le. In-
deed, such a possibility —and its panoptic God —is explicitly rejected by Truman
at the end of the movie as he opts to step out into the unknown rather than remain
with what is certain and secure. Truman finally is a true human being insofar as he
is an explorer, someone on a quest, someone for whom the future is open , in which
possibility rules.22 Christof confirms that Truman was “curious from birth” (79)
and, as noted above, we see in a flashback of Truman in grade school that he wants
to be an explorer like Magellan when he grows up (6). He owns a book entitled
To the Ends of the Earth —The Age of Exploration (81) and a stack of Great Ex-
plorers magazines (28). His apparent fixation on Sylvia —he has her sweater and
continually buys women’s magazines in order to acquire elements of a woman’s
face to piece together a portrait of Sylvia —falls into the same category: she sign i-
fies possibilities unexplored. In his quest he becom es “crafty” and “deceitful”23 as
he tries to contend with forces he does not understand. It is then t hat Truman comes
15Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
alive for us —is most human —as he tries to fight for those possibilities. Even when
thwarted, he is more interesting and more alive than w hen he follows his routine.
Thus we are literally on the edge of our seats as he strikes out on the “high seas”
for parts unknown. In short, Truman seems to confirm that the essence of humanity
is “to be carried by [being], to be driven about by its oppo sitions and marked by its
discord ... to remain exposed to all its sundering confusions .”24 Rather than settling
for safety and security by playing his assigned role, putting his faith and trust in a
superior power who control s the world, the true human bei ng calls into question
that world and what his or her role is to be.
The World: Paradise Rejected
Our society is one not of spectacle, but of surveillance ... We are neither in the amphitheatre, nor on
the stage, but in the panoptic machine, invested by i ts effects of power, which we bring to ourselves
since we are part of its mechanism.25
The world of Seahaven and the Omni cam Ecosphere can be interpreted in a
number of ways that have religious overtones . In one sense, it is reminiscent of
ancient concep tions of the cosmos: an island of land surrounded by the primordial
depths, capped by the solid dome of the heavens.26 In that sense, it is an entire
world unto itself. More importantly, however, the name Seahaven suggests that
Truman’s world is a kind of heaven, or, alternatively, heaven on earth, i.e., paradise.
The latter interpretation is reinforced by a headline in the local newspaper: The
16Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
Island Times : The Best Place on Earth . That is to say, Seahaven is like Eden, a
place of luxury, pleasure and delight (the meaning of the Hebrew eden ), a “divine
park” created just for Truman , just as the Garden of Eden was created for Adam .
Indeed, it is park -like in its appearance. It is clean and well maintained; there is no
litter, there are no slums. The weather is perfect, neither too hot nor too cold, and
the general population is friendly and well -behaved. It is literally and figuratively
a utopia, i.e., no place, cut off from the outside world, an island cut off fr om any
connection to any other place on earth.
Following this line of thinking, Seahaven represents what Colleen McDan-
nell and Bernhard Lang call an “anthropocentric” model of heaven. Such models
have been popular off and on throughout the religious hist ory of the West; its mod-
ern formulations are found in theological writings of the 18th and 19th centuries and
live on today in the theology of the Church of Latter Day Saints and in our popular
(religious) imagination.27 Such models portray heaven in sens ual, material terms,
usually as an idealized life similar to the life we live on earth, a life characterized
by productive work, spiritual development and reunions with those we love. So
Truman lives in a world no different than the world outside the Ecos phere (except
for the absolute safety he enjoys) (106), in which he makes choices that contribute
to and shape the world around him, and in which he is reunited with his long lost
father. Of course, the details of the sensual, material views of heaven pre sented in
18th and 19th century theology vary in terms of how closely heaven resembles life
17Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
on earth, particularly with regard to the matter of sexual relations. Interestingly, the
world of The Truman Show has similar problems: there are no cameras aimed at
the toilet, and Truman’s sex life is “classical music, soft lighting and so on” (81),
almost as if these elements of human life do not exist in Truman’s world.
Nonetheless, the movie suggests in a number of ways that the world of Sea-
haven and the Omnic am Ecosphere is a dystopia rather than a utopia or, rather, that
any utopia (including God’s promise of paradise) is a dystopia that should be re-
jected by any true human being. We have already noted, for instance, that the Eco-
sphere is reminiscent of Jere my Bentham’s Panopticon prison. Another way in
which the movie suggests that this is a dystopia is through the imagery of the movie.
In the anthropocentric models of heaven of the 18th and 19th centuries, it was com-
mon to think of heaven as on the other shore. So in a hymn by Isaac Watts it is said
that “Death like a narrow sea divides/ This heavenly land from ours.”28 Corre-
spondingly, Truman sets out from Seahaven near the end of the movie across a
narrow sea —and he appears to die. Swamped by storm and waves as Christof tries
to get him to turn back, one has the impression that Truman has drowned; the au-
diences in the control room and around the world bow their heads as if mourning
Truman’s passing. Regaining consciousness, Truman a short while later t ouches
the heavens as he comes to the end of the world. Walking along the walkway at the
edge of the world (giving the visual impression that Truman is walking on wate r),
Truman comes to a staircase, which he climbs into “the heavens ” toward the exit
18Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
of th e Ecosphere. It is at this point that Christof addresses and makes himself
known to Truman for the first time.
What follows builds on this im agery to suggest that paradise and true sal-
vation lie on this other shore, outside this world specially made for a man by his
“creator.” Standing at the exit of t he world made for him , Christof finally addresses
Truman, answering Truman’s questioning by saying that “I am the creator —of a
television show that gives hope and joy and inspiration to millions.” Truman’s eyes
are finally opened. “Who am I?” he asks. “You are the star,” replies Christof.
“Was nothing real?” asks Truman, to which Christof responds by saying
You were real. That’s what made you so good to watch. There’s no
more truth out there than in the world I created for you. Same lies,
same deceit. But in my world, you have nothing to fear. I know you
better than you know yourself ... You’re afraid. Tha t’s why you
can’t leave. It’s okay Truman. I understand. I have been watching
you your whole life. I was watching when you were born. I was
watching when you took your first step. I watched you on your first
day of school. The episode when you lost your first tooth. You can’t
leave, Truman. You belong here, with me. Talk to me. Say some-
thing. Say something, goddammit , you’re on television! You’r e
live to the whole world!
Truman is being offered a kind of heaven: living with Christof/God, in a world “that
gives hope and joy and inspiration to millions,” just like the Promised Land or the
promise of heavenly salvation in Western religions. However, offered the possibil-
ity of living in the world as it should be (according to Christof), Truman literally
bows out. Instead, he opts for the unknown possibilities that await him outside the
Ecosphere. His coming to know himself result s in a rejection of this utopi a, and
19Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
rejection of its creator/ God (or, at least, the commonly held Western conception of
God embodied by the character of Christof). Here too The Truman Show inverts
the meaning of the creation story in the Book of Genesis, for Truman is not ejected
from the Garden: he leaves knowingly. Paradise is not lost; it is rejected. Or, like
the story in the Book of Genesis, where Adam and Eve are ejected because they
have eaten of the Tree of Knowledge, it is the knowledge that Truman has gained
that leads to his exit from Se ahaven and the Ecosphere. Truman’s exit puts the lie
to the words of Marlon/Louis Coltrane, who said at the beginning of the movie that
“It’s all true, it’s all real. Nothing here is fake. Nothing you see on this show is
fake. It’s merely controlled.” His exit puts a lie to Christof’s remarks that “it’s
genuine. It’s a life.” It is not a life; it is not true, because it is completely closed
off and not open. Truman’s scripted, controlled life is meaningless, because the
meaning of human being lies in its possibilities. We cannot win if losing is not an
option. If failure is not a possibility, neither is disc overy. Hence to reject utopia —
even heaven itself —is to reject meaninglessness. The “true man” is not one to have
faith in an omniscient, omnipo tent God or the salvation and security He promises.
However, like all great comedies, the movie ends equivocally. In a scene
that is not in t he shooting script, we see the two garage attendants who have been
shown watching the show throughout the movie. They are shown looking at the
static filled television screen. The one turns to the other and s ays: “You want an-
other slice? —No, I’m okay. What else is on? —Yeah, let’s see what else is on.
20Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
Where’s the TV Guide ?” In other words, we, and the audience i n the movie, have
just cheered the supposedly true human being and the affirmation of the meaning
of his life, which has entailed the rejection of the all -seeing, all -knowing spectator
of his life. Yet, having “learned” this lesson, these two men still wa nt the security
of television and its controlled, antiseptic vision of the world presented by omnis-
cient, omnipotent sponsors, producers, and directors. We are left then to wonder
whether they, rather than Truman, are the true human beings.
Conclusion
While occasionally doubling us up with laughter, The Truman Show , inter-
preted allegorically, also doubles up its portrayals of God, humanity and the world,
calling each into question. Christof, the creator and director of Truman’s world ,
controls the things , forces, and people within that world and constantly watches
over Truman, both in the sense of looking out for and caring about Truman’s well -
being and in the sense of keeping Truman under constant surveillance. Christof
thus shares many of the character istics we associate with our Western conception
of God: omnipotent, omniscient and seemingly benev olent. However, as we have
shown, Christof’s detached supervision of Truman means that Truman is not free
but ultimately an object to be manipulated, confined, and controlled. In the end,
this panoptic God of the Ecosphere is malevolent rather than benevolent and re-
jected by Truman.
21Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
As for Truman, he is a “true man ,” a true human being. But what does that
mean? On the one hand, he (along with his television audience) is tempted to be
content with the safety , order and security of his world, in which apparent anoma-
lies find some explanation and everything is as it should be . Nonetheless, because
of the anomalies that ar ise in this “perfect” world, this true human is finally driven
to question his world and longs to explore new horizons. Ultimately Truman feels
compelled to withdraw from a world overseen by a panoptic director and to reject
any offer of a perfect world. With Truma n’s rejection of Christof’s world , the
movie supports the rejection of a panoptic God that provides safety and security
and favor s an understanding of human beings that celebrates their f reedom and their
possibilities. Nonetheless, with its final, unscripted scene, the movie acknowledges
that, ironically, those possibilities include a desire for security, closure and confine-
ment surveyed and controlled by a divine, watchful eye.
1 For discussions of Christ -figures and their characteristics in film, see Adele Reinhartz, “Jesus and
Christ -figures” in The Routledge Companion to Religion and Film , ed. John Lyd en (London:
Routledge, 2009), 43 0-436; Lloyd Baugh, Imaging the Divine: Jesus and Christ -Figures in Film,
Communication, Culture and Theology (Kansas City, MO: Sheed & Ward, 1997); Anton Koslovic,
“The Structural Characteristics of the Cinematic Christ -Figure,” Journal of Religion and Popular
Culture 8 (200 4). Online. Available <HTTP: www.usask.ca/relst/jrpc/art8 -cinematicchrist -
print.html > (accessed 29/09/2010 10:55:13 AM) .
2 In another movie (which was first a play), Inherit t he Wind —based on the Scopes trial —Matthew
Harrison Brady (the character based on William Jennings Bryan) suggests that God is on the dark
side of the moon when he asks a witness “And when he was wondering about what was on the other
side of the moon, did h e ever mention the possibility of heaven?” Cf. the comments of the funda-
mentalist preacher Dr. Greg Dickson in the video The Long Search: Protestan tism USA (New York:
Ambrose Video, 1978): “I believe tonight if you could get into a rocket ship and propel yourself
22Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
beyond the atmosphere, the stratosphere, the ionosphere, on past this solar system of ours, on past
the Milky Way that makes up our galaxy and on p ast a million other galaxies like this, you would
come to a place that the Bible calls heaven. And when I say that heaven is a real place I mean that
it can be geographically located.”
3 The Greek Septuagint uses the word “Pantocrator” (“Almighty ,” “Rule r of All,” “Sustainer of
All”) to translate both “Yahweh” ( specifically, Yahweh Sabaoth , “Yahweh of Hosts ”; see 2 Kings
[2 Samuel] 7:8 and Amos 3:13 ) and “El Shaddai” (e.g., Job 5:17, 25 and 22:25) in the Hebrew Bible .
In the New Testament, St. Paul (2 Co rinthians 6:18) and the Book of Revelation (1:8, 4:8, 11:17,
15:13, 16:7,14, 19:6, 19:15, 21:22) use “Pantocrator” in reference to God or God and Christ. See
Harper’s Bible Dictionary , ed. Paul J. Achtemeier (San Francisco , CA : Harper and Row, 1985),
684-685.
4 Page references in the text are to Andrew Niccol, The Truman Show: The Shooting Script (New
York: Newmarket Press, 1998). Note that there are (usually small) differences between the movie
and the shooting script in terms of dialogue or the placement of that dialogue. Quotes or references
to events in the movie without page references are taken directly from t he movie.
5 Hans Jonas, “The Nobility of Sight: A Study in the Phenomenology of the Senses” in The Phe-
nomenon of Life. Toward a Philosophical Biology (New York: Harper and Row, 1966), 135 -156.
For an overview of the importance of vision in Western think ing, see the first two chapters (“The
Noblest of Senses: Vision from Plato to Descartes,” 21 -82, and “Dialectic of EnLIGHTenment,”
83-147) of Martin Jay’s Downcast Eyes. The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth -Century French
Thought (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993).
6 René Descartes, Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy , 4th ed., trans. Donald
A. Cress (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1998), 62.
7 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punishment: The Birth of the Prison , trans. Alan Sheridan (New
York: Pantheon, 1977), 201 -202.
8 Interestingly, in The Shooting Script , Christof does not appear at the beginning of the movie and
we catch only very brief glimpses of him at pages 18 (scene 27), 36 (scene 50) and 40 (scene 64)
(though he is unidentified to viewer s of the movie). In both the shooting script and the movie, he
does not enter the picture as a major “player” until approximately one hour into the movie (page 68,
scene 98 in the shooting script) with the “resurrection” of Ki rk Burbank.
9 Foucault, 187.
10 Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness , trans. Hazel E. Barnes (New York: Pocket Books,
1957), 352 and the entire section entitled “The Look,” 340 -400. Of course, Martin Heidegger pre-
ceded Sartre in investigat ing how the r eduction of being —ours and the world’s —has taken place in
the history of Western thought (centering on particular metaphors for sight), culminating with our
contemporary fascination with technique and technology. See, e.g., Being and Time , trans. Jo an
Stambaugh, revised by Dennis Schmidt (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2010 ), 69f,
134, 142, 164ff, 340ff, and Questions Concerning Technology and Other Essays , trans. William
Lovitt (New York: Harper and Row, 1977) (hereafter QCT ). For summary an alyses of these themes
in Heidegger, see Stephen Houlgate, “Vision, Reflection, and Openness: The ‘Hegemony of Vision’
from a Hegelian Point of View” and David Michael Levin, “Decline and Fall: Ocularcentrism in
Heidegger’s Reading of the History of Metaph ysics” in Modernity and the Hegemony of Vision , ed.
23Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
David Michael Levin (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), 87 -98 and 186 -217. See also
William McNeill, The Glance of the Eye. Heidegger, Aristotle, and the Ends of Theory (Albany:
State Unive rsity of New York Press, 1999).
11 Jacques -Alain Miller , “Jeremy Bentham’s Panoptic Device,” trans. Richard Miller October 41
(1987): 6 -7.
12 Martin Heidegger characterized the essence of modern technology —the summation of a long
development of Western th ought along the lines of sight —as Ge-stell, a kind of “gathered setting”
in place of objects before a subject, playing on the meaning of the German word stellen (“to place”)
and its cognates (e.g., vorstellen , “to represent,” i.e., “to place before”). See, in particular, the first
two essays in Questions Concerning Technology and Other Essays , translated by William Lovitt.
New York: Harper and Row, 1977: “The Question Concerning Technology,”19 -35 and “The Tur n-
ing,” 36 -49.
13 Jay, 410.
14 For example , when an interviewer notes that “Truman has always been very much in on casting,”
Christof says: “As with our own lives, the only people he can’t cast are his family. Otherwise he
has final approval ...” (76). La ter, in answer to a phone call from Sylvia during the same interview,
he notes that Truman “can leave at any time” (80).
15 See, e.g., Thorlief Boman, Hebrew Thought Compared with the Greek , trans. Jules L. Moreau
(London: SCM Press, 1960), 74ff, and Susan A. Handelman, The Slayers of Moses: The Emergence
of Rabbinic Interpretation in Modern Literary Theory (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1982), 3 -25.
16 For example , 2 Kings 19: 27, Psalm 94:11, Jeremiah 12:3, Job 31:4, Hebrews 4:13. See also John
2:24 in the New Testament .
17 This is David Grene’s translation in The Complete Greek Tragedies: Volume II, Sophocles , ed.
David Grene and Richard Lattimore (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1992), 174 -175.
Note that I have referenced the traditional numbering of the lines in Greek; Grene’s numbering in
his translation corresponds to the number of lines in his English translation.
18 “The child was named ‘Truman’ by Christof — ‘We will make of him a “True Man”,’ Christof
stated in a press -release at the time” the show was launched; Peter Weir, “Introduction ” in Niccol,
The Shooting Script , xiii.
19 Reinhartz (431) thinks two characteristics suffice to characterize the Ch rist-figure, while Lloyd
Baugh lists eight character istics and Anton Koslovic lists twenty -five characteristics.
20 See John S. Kselman, “Genesis” in Harper’s Bible Commentary , ed. James L. Mays (San Fran-
cisco, CA: Harper and Row, 1988), 88.
21 Shooting Script , 75. This observation, which Christof makes while being interviewed for “Tru
Talk,” has been edited out of the interview (scene 108 in the script) and placed at the beginning of
the movie.
24Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
22 At the close of another cotemporaneous movie that spoof s our nostalgia for the past as em bodied
by old television shows —Pleasantville (1998) —two of the lead characters, now transformed from
black and white into color, sit on a park bench and remark that they don’t know what is going to
happen next. The point, of course, is that life does not follow the familiar “dramatic” arcs of tele-
vision sitcoms and dramas; it is open -ended.
23 Cf. the pun on ‘arummim , “naked,” and ‘arum , “crafty,” in the Genesis 2:25; 3:1,7. But note too
that this is not only the ancient Hebrew characterization of human beings; see Sophocles’ Antigone ,
lines 332 -375, with its references to the “contrivances” and “cunning” of human beings.
24 Heidegger, Questions Concerning Technology, 131.
25 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punishment , 217.
26 See, e.g., Joel W. Rosenberg’s account of the “firmament” (with an accompanying illustration of
the cosmos) in Harper’s Bible Dictionary , ed. Paul J. Achtemeier (San Francisco, CA: Harper and
Row, 1985), 309 -310. For early Greek conceptions of th e cosmos, see, e.g., John Mansley Robin-
son, An Introduction to Early Greek Philosophy (Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1968), 3ff.
27 Heaven: A History (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1988), 181ff.
28 From Isaac Watts’ hymn “A Prospect of Heaven Makes Death Easy,” quoted in McDannell and
Lang, 185.
References
Baugh, Lloyd. Imaging the Divine: Jesus and Christ -Figures in Film, Communication, Culture and
Theology . Kansas City, MO: Sheed & Ward, 1997.
Boman, Thorlief. Hebrew Thought Compared with the Greek , trans. Jules L. Moreau. London: SCM
Press, 1960 .
The Complete Greek Tragedies: Volume II, Sophocles , edited by David Grene and Richard Lat-
timore. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Descartes, René. Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy , fourth edition, trans.
Donald A. Cress. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1998 .
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punishment: The Birth of the Prison , translated by Alan Sheridan.
New York: Pa ntheon, 1977.
Handelman, Susan A. The Slayers of Moses: The Emergence of Rabbinic Interpretation in Modern
Literary Theory . Albany: State University of New York Press, 1982 .
Harper’s Bible Dictionary , edited by Paul J. Achtemeier. San Francisco, CA: Harpe r and Row,
1985 .
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time , translated by Joan Stambaugh, revised by Dennis Schmidt.
Albany: State University of New York Press, 2010.
25Gall: Reflections on "The Truman Show"
Published by DigitalCommons@UNO, 2019
Heidegger, Martin. Questions Concerning Technology and Other Essays , translated by William
Lovitt. New York: Harper and Row, 1977.
Houlgate, Stephen . “Vision, Reflection, and Openness: The ‘Hegemony of Vision’ fro m a Hegelian
Point of View.” I n Modernity and the Hegemony of Vision , edited by David Michael Levin . Berke-
ley: University of Californ ia Press, 1993 .
Jay, Martin. Downcast Eyes. The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth -Century French Thought .
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
Jonas, Hans. The Phenomenon of Life. Toward a Philosophical Biology . New York: Harper and
Row, 1966 .
Koslovic, Anton . “The Structural Characteristics of the Cinematic Christ -Figure,” Journal of Reli-
gion and Popular Culture 8 (2004). Accessed September 29, 2010.
http://www.us ask.ca/relst/jrpc/art8 -cinematicchrist -print.html >
Kselman, John S. “Genesis.” In Harper’s Bible Commentary , edited by James L. Mays. San Fran-
cisco, CA: Harper and Row, 1988.
Levin, David Michael. “Decline and Fall: Ocularcentrism in Heidegger’s Reading of the History of
Metaphysics.” In Modernity and the Hegemony of Vision , edited by David Michael Levin. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1993.
The Long Search: Protestantism USA . New York: Ambrose Video, 1978.
McDannell, Colleen and Bernhard Lang . Heaven: A History . New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1988.
McNeill, William. The Glance of the Eye. Heidegger, Aristotle, and the Ends of Theory . Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1999.
Miller, Jacques -Alain, and Richard Miller. "Jeremy Bentham's Panoptic Device." October 41
(1987): 3 -29.
Niccol, Andrew. The Truman Show: The Shooting Script . New York: Newmarket Press, 1998.
Reinhartz, Adele . “Jesus and Christ -figures .” In The Routledge Companion to Religion and Film ,
edited by John Lyden (L ondon: Routledge, 2009) .
Robinson, John Mansley. An Introduction to Early Greek Philosophy . Boston, MA: Houghton Mif-
flin, 1968.
Sartre, Jean -Paul. Being and Nothingness , translated by Hazel E. Barnes . New York: Pocket Books,
1957.
Weir, Peter. “Introduction.” In The Truman Show: The Shooting Script . New York: Newmarket
Press, 1998 .
26Journal of Religion & Film, Vol. 23 [2019], Iss. 1, Art. 48
https://digitalcommons.unomaha.edu/jrf/vol23/iss1/48
DOI: https://doi.org/10.32873/uno.dc.jrf.23.01.48
